T-1.I.1. There is no order of difficulty in miracles. 2 One is not "harder" or "bigger" than another. 3
T-1.I.2. Miracles as such do not matter. 2 The only thing that matters is their Source, which is far
T-1.I.3. Miracles occur naturally as expressions of love. 2 The real miracle is the love that inspires
T-1.I.4. All miracles mean life, and God is the Giver of life. 2 His Voice will direct you very
T-1.I.5. Miracles are habits, and should be involuntary. 2 They should not be under conscious
T-1.I.6. Miracles are natural. 2 When they do not occur something has gone wrong.
T-1.I.7. Miracles are everyone's right, but purification is necessary first.
T-1.I.8. Miracles are healing because they supply a lack; they are performed by those who
T-1.I.9. Miracles are a kind of exchange. 2 Like all expressions of love, which are always
T-1.I.10. The use of miracles as spectacles to induce belief is a misunderstanding of their purpose.
T-1.I.11. Prayer is the medium of miracles. 2 It is a means of communication of the created with the
T-1.I.12. Miracles are thoughts. 2 Thoughts can represent the lower or bodily level of experience, or
T-1.I.13. Miracles are both beginnings and endings, and so they alter the temporal order. 2 They are
T-1.I.14. Miracles bear witness to truth. 2 They are convincing because they arise from conviction.
T-1.I.15. Each day should be devoted to miracles. 2 The purpose of time is to enable you to learn
T-1.I.16. Miracles are teaching devices for demonstrating it is as blessed to give as to receive. 2
T-1.I.17. Miracles transcend the body. 2 They are sudden shifts into invisibility, away from the
T-1.I.18. A miracle is a service. 2 It is the maximal service you can render to another. 3 It is a way
T-1.I.19. Miracles make minds one in God. 2 They depend on cooperation because the Sonship is
T-1.I.20. Miracles reawaken the awareness that the spirit, not the body, is the altar of truth. 2 This is
T-1.I.21. Miracles are natural signs of forgiveness. 2 Through miracles you accept God's forgiveness
T-1.I.22. Miracles are associated with fear only because of the belief that darkness can hide. 2 You
T-1.I.23. Miracles rearrange perception and place all levels in true perspective. 2 This is healing
T-1.I.24. Miracles enable you to heal the sick and raise the dead because you made sickness and
T-1.I.25. Miracles are part of an interlocking chain of forgiveness which, when completed, is the
T-1.I.26. Miracles represent freedom from fear. 2 "Atoning" means "undoing." 3 The undoing of
T-1.I.27. A miracle is a universal blessing from God through me to all my brothers. 2 It is the
T-1.I.28. Miracles are a way of earning release from fear. 2 Revelation induces a state in which fear
T-1.I.29. Miracles praise God through you. 2 They praise Him by honoring His creations, affirming
T-1.I.30. By recognizing spirit, miracles adjust the levels of perception and show them in proper
T-1.I.31. Miracles should inspire gratitude, not awe. 2 You should thank God for what you really
T-1.I.32. I inspire all miracles, which are really intercessions. 2 They intercede for your holiness
T-1.I.33. Miracles honor you because you are lovable. 2 They dispel illusions about yourself and
T-1.I.34. Miracles restore the mind to its fullness. 2 By atoning for lack they establish perfect
T-1.I.35. Miracles are expressions of love, but they may not always have observable effects.
T-1.I.36. Miracles are examples of right thinking, aligning your perceptions with truth as God
T-1.I.37. A miracle is a correction introduced into false thinking by me. 2 It acts as a catalyst,
T-1.I.38. The Holy Spirit is the mechanism of miracles. 2 He recognizes both God's creations and
T-1.I.39. The miracle dissolves error because the Holy Spirit identifies error as false or unreal. 2
T-1.I.40. The miracle acknowledges everyone as your brother and mine. 2 It is a way of perceiving
T-1.I.41. Wholeness is the perceptual content of miracles. 2 They thus correct, or atone for, the
T-1.I.42. A major contribution of miracles is their strength in releasing you from your false sense of
T-1.I.43. Miracles arise from a miraculous state of mind, or a state of miracle-readiness.
T-1.I.44. The miracle is an expression of an inner awareness of Christ and the acceptance of His
T-1.I.45. A miracle is never lost. 2 It may touch many people you have not even met, and produce
T-1.I.46. The Holy Spirit is the highest communication medium. 2 Miracles do not involve this type
T-1.I.47. The miracle is a learning device that lessens the need for time. 2 It establishes an out-of-pattern time interval not under the usual laws of time. 3 In this sense it is timeless.
T-1.I.48. The miracle is the only device at your immediate disposal for controlling time. 2 Only
T-1.I.49. The miracle makes no distinction among degrees of misperception. 2 It is a device for
T-1.I.50. The miracle compares what you have made with creation, accepting what is in accord with
T-1.II.1. Revelation induces complete but temporary suspension of doubt and fear. 2 It reflects the
T-1.II.2. Revelation is intensely personal and cannot be meaningfully translated. 2 That is why any
T-1.II.3. Awe should be reserved for revelation, to which it is perfectly and correctly applicable. 2 It
T-1.II.4. "No man cometh unto the Father but by me" does not mean that I am in any way separate
T-1.II.5. Revelations are indirectly inspired by me because I am close to the Holy Spirit, and alert to
T-1.II.6. The miracle minimizes the need for time. 2 In the longitudinal or horizontal plane the
T-1.III.1. I am in charge of the process of Atonement, which I undertook to begin. 2 When you
T-1.III.2. "Heaven and earth shall pass away" means that they will not continue to exist as separate
T-1.III.3. The forgiven are the means of the Atonement. 2 Being filled with spirit, they forgive in
T-1.III.4. I am the only one who can perform miracles indiscriminately, because I am the
T-1.III.5. Error cannot really threaten truth, which can always withstand it. 2 Only the error is
T-1.III.6. You respond to what you perceive, and as you perceive so shall you behave. 2 The
T-1.III.7. Miracles arise from a mind that is ready for them. 2 By being united this mind goes out to
T-1.III.8. That the miracle may have effects on your brothers that you may not recognize is not your
T-1.III.9. Miracles are selective only in the sense that they are directed towards those who can use
T-1.IV.1. The escape from darkness involves two stages: First, the recognition that darkness cannot
T-1.IV.2. Holiness can never be really hidden in darkness, but you can deceive yourself about it. 2
T-1.IV.3. Darkness is lack of light as sin is lack of love. 2 It has no unique properties of its own. 3 It
T-1.IV.4. The emptiness engendered by fear must be replaced by forgiveness. 2 That is what the
T-1.V.1. The miracle is much like the body in that both are learning aids for facilitating a state in
T-1.V.2. The basic decision of the miracle-minded is not to wait on time any longer than is
T-1.V.3. When the Atonement has been completed, all talents will be shared by all the Sons of God.
T-1.V.4. Ultimately, every member of the family of God must return. 2 The miracle calls him to
T-1.V.5. Whatever is true is eternal, and cannot change or be changed. 2 Spirit is therefore
T-1.V.6. The miracle is a sign that the mind has chosen to be led by me in Christ's service. 2 The
T-1.VI.1. You who want peace can find it only by complete forgiveness. 2 No learning is acquired
T-1.VI.2. A sense of separation from God is the only lack you really need correct. 2 This sense of
T-1.VI.3. The idea of orders of need, which follows from the original error that one can be
T-1.VI.4. The real purpose of this world is to use it to correct your unbelief. 2 You can never
T-1.VI.5. All aspects of fear are untrue because they do not exist at the creative level, and therefore
T-1.VII.1. Your distorted perceptions produce a dense cover over miracle impulses, making it hard
T-1.VII.2. Child of God, you were created to create the good, the beautiful and the holy. 2 Do not
T-1.VII.3. Fantasy is a distorted form of vision. 2 Fantasies of any kind are distortions, because they
T-1.VII.4. This is a course in mind training. 2 All learning involves attention and study at some
T-1.VII.5. A solid foundation is necessary because of the confusion between fear and awe to which
T-2.I.1. To extend is a fundamental aspect of God which He gave to His Son. 2 In the creation, God
T-2.I.2. These related distortions represent a picture of what actually occurred in the separation, or
T-2.I.3. The Garden of Eden, or the pre-separation condition, was a state of mind in which nothing
T-2.I.4. All fear is ultimately reducible to the basic misperception that you have the ability to usurp
T-2.I.5. Whatever lies you may believe are of no concern to the miracle, which can heal any of
T-2.II.1. You can do anything I ask. 2 I have asked you to perform miracles, and have made it clear
T-2.II.2. True denial is a powerful protective device. 2 You can and should deny any belief that
T-2.II.3. You can defend truth as well as error. 2 The means are easier to understand after the value
T-2.II.4. The Atonement is the only defense that cannot be used destructively because it is not a
T-2.II.5. The Atonement was built into the space-time belief to set a limit on the need for the belief
T-2.II.6. Evolution is a process in which you seem to proceed from one degree to the next. 2 You
T-2.II.7. The Atonement is a total commitment. 2 You may still think this is associated with loss, a
T-2.III.1. The Atonement can only be accepted within you by releasing the inner light. 2 Since the
T-2.III.2. For perfect effectiveness the Atonement belongs at the center of the inner altar, where it
T-2.III.3. The acceptance of the Atonement by everyone is only a matter of time. 2 This may appear
T-2.III.4. Spiritual vision literally cannot see error, and merely looks for Atonement. 2 All solutions
T-2.III.5. The children of God are entitled to the perfect comfort that comes from perfect trust. 2
T-2.IV.1. Our emphasis is now on healing. 2 The miracle is the means, the Atonement is the
T-2.IV.2. A major step in the Atonement plan is to undo error at all levels. 2 Sickness or "not-right-mindedness" is the result of level confusion, because it always entails the belief that what is amiss
T-2.IV.3. Only the mind can create because spirit has already been created, and the body is a
T-2.IV.4. All material means that you accept as remedies for bodily ills are restatements of magic
T-2.IV.5. The value of the Atonement does not lie in the manner in which it is expressed. 2 In fact,
T-2.V.1. Before miracle workers are ready to undertake their function in this world, it is essential
T-2.V.2. Magic is the mindless or the miscreative use of mind. 2 Physical medications are forms of
T-2.V.3. I have already said that miracles are expressions of miracle-mindedness, and miracle
T-2.V.4. The healer who relies on his own readiness is endangering his understanding. 2 You are
T-2.V.5. The sole responsibility of the miracle worker is to accept the Atonement for himself. 5 2
T-2.V.6. It should be emphasized again that the body does not learn any more than it creates. 2 As a
T-2.V.7. Corrective learning always begins with the awakening of spirit, and the turning away from
T-2.V.8. The fear of healing arises in the end from an unwillingness to accept unequivocally that
T-2.V.9. Healing is an ability that developed after the separation, before which it was unnecessary. 2
T-2.V.10. Charity is a way of looking at another as if he had already gone far beyond his actual
T-2.V.A.11. A. Special Principles of Miracle Workers (1) The miracle abolishes the need for lower-order concerns. 2 Since it is an out-of-pattern time interval, the ordinary considerations of time and
T-2.V.A.12. (2) A clear distinction between what is created and what is made is essential. 2 All
T-2.V.A.13. (3) Never confuse right- and wrong-mindedness. 2 Responding to any form of error
T-2.V.A.14. (4) The miracle is always a denial of this error and an affirmation of the truth. 2 Only
T-2.V.A.15. (5) The level-adjustment power of the miracle induces the right perception for healing.
T-2.V.A.16. (6) Miracle-minded forgiveness is only correction. 2 It has no element of judgment at
T-2.V.A.17. (7) The injunction "Be of one mind" is the statement for revelation-readiness. 2 My
T-2.V.A.18. (8) You can do much on behalf of your own healing and that of others if, in a situation
T-2.VI.1. Being afraid seems to be involuntary; something beyond your own control. 2 Yet I have
T-2.VI.2. I do not foster level confusion, but you must choose to correct it. 2 You would not excuse
T-2.VI.3. It is pointless to believe that controlling the outcome of misthought can result in healing.
T-2.VI.4. The correction of fear is your responsibility. 2 When you ask for release from fear, you
T-2.VI.5. Fear is always a sign of strain, arising whenever what you want conflicts with what you
T-2.VI.6. It is possible to reach a state in which you bring your mind under my guidance without
T-2.VI.7. The first corrective step in undoing the error is to know first that the conflict is an
T-2.VI.8. I have emphasized that the miracle, or the expression of Atonement, is always a sign of
T-2.VI.9. Everyone experiences fear. 2 Yet it would take very little right thinking to realize why
T-2.VII.1. You may still complain about fear, but you nevertheless persist in making yourself
T-2.VII.2. I cannot let you leave your mind unguarded, or you will not be able to help me. 2 Miracle
T-2.VII.3. Both miracles and fear come from thoughts. 2 If you are not free to choose one, you
T-2.VII.4. It has already been said that you believe you cannot control fear because you yourself
T-2.VII.5. Nothing and everything cannot coexist. 2 To believe in one is to deny the other. 3 Fear is
T-2.VII.6. It should especially be noted that God has only one Son. 2 If all His creations are His
T-2.VII.7. I have already briefly spoken about readiness, but some additional points might be
T-2.VIII.1. One of the ways in which you can correct the magic-miracle confusion is to remember
T-2.VIII.2. The Last Judgment is one of the most threatening ideas in your thinking. 2 This is
T-2.VIII.3. The Last Judgment is generally thought of as a procedure undertaken by God. 2 Actually
T-2.VIII.4. The first step toward freedom involves a sorting out of the false from the true. 2 This is
T-2.VIII.5. The term "Last Judgment" is frightening not only because it has been projected onto
T-3.I.1. A further point must be perfectly clear before any residual fear still associated with miracles
T-3.I.2. The best defense, as always, is not to attack another's position, but rather to protect the
T-3.I.3. The statement "Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord" is a misperception by which one assigns
T-3.I.4. Sacrifice is a notion totally unknown to God. 2 It arises solely from fear, and frightened
T-3.I.5. I have been correctly referred to as "the lamb of God who taketh away the sins of the
T-3.I.6. Innocence is incapable of sacrificing anything, because the innocent mind has everything
T-3.I.7. The Atonement itself radiates nothing but truth. 2 It therefore epitomizes harmlessness and
T-3.I.8. The innocence of God is the true state of the mind of His Son. 2 In this state your mind
T-3.II.1. I have stated that the basic concepts referred to in this course are not matters of degree. 2
T-3.II.2. Innocence is not a partial attribute. 2 It is not real until it is total. 3 The partly innocent are
T-3.II.3. When you lack confidence in what someone will do, you are attesting to your belief that he
T-3.II.4. You are afraid of God's Will because you have used your own mind, which He created in
T-3.II.5. Nothing can prevail against a Son of God who commends his spirit into the Hands of his
T-3.II.6. The way to correct distortions is to withdraw your faith in them and invest it only in what
T-3.III.1. We have been emphasizing perception, and have said very little about knowledge as yet. 2
T-3.III.2. All your difficulties stem from the fact that you do not recognize yourself, your brother or
T-3.III.3. The questioning mind perceives itself in time, and therefore looks for future answers. 2
T-3.III.4. True vision is the natural perception of spiritual sight, but it is still a correction rather than
T-3.III.5. The Bible tells you to know yourself, or to be certain. 2 Certainty is always of God. 0 3
T-3.III.6. Right perception is necessary before God can communicate directly to His altars, which
T-3.III.7. If you attack error in another, you will hurt yourself. 2 You cannot know your brother
T-3.IV.1. The abilities you now possess are only shadows of your real strength. 2 All of your
T-3.IV.2. Consciousness, the level of perception, was the first split introduced into the mind after
T-3.IV.3. The ego is the questioning aspect of the post-separation self, which was made rather than
T-3.IV.4. Right-mindedness is not to be confused with the knowing mind, because it is applicable
T-3.IV.5. Perception always involves some misuse of mind, because it brings the mind into areas of
T-3.IV.6. The ability to perceive made the body possible, because you must perceive something and
T-3.IV.7. God and His creations remain in surety, and therefore know that no miscreation exists. 2
T-3.V.1. I have said that the abilities you possess are only shadows of your real strength, and that
T-3.V.2. Since the separation, the words "create" and "make" have become confused. 2 When you
T-3.V.3. Knowing, as we have already observed, does not lead to doing. 2 The confusion between
T-3.V.4. The fundamental question you continually ask yourself cannot properly be directed to
T-3.V.5. Knowing is not open to interpretation. 2 You may try to "interpret" meaning, but this is
T-3.V.6. Prayer is a way of asking for something. 2 It is the medium of miracles. 3 But the only
T-3.V.7. The statement "God created man in his own image and likeness" needs reinterpretation. 2
T-3.V.8. What happens to perceptions if there are no judgments and nothing but perfect equality? 2
T-3.V.9. Forgiveness is the healing of the perception of separation. 2 Correct perception of your
T-3.V.10. As long as perception lasts prayer has a place. 2 Since perception rests on lack, those who
T-3.VI.1. We have already discussed the Last Judgment, but in insufficient detail. 2 After the Last
T-3.VI.2. The choice to judge rather than to know is the cause of the loss of peace. 2 Judgment is
T-3.VI.3. You have no idea of the tremendous release and deep peace that comes from meeting
T-3.VI.4. You are very fearful of everything you have perceived but have refused to accept. 2 You
T-3.VI.5. When you feel tired, it is because you have judged yourself as capable of being tired. 2
T-3.VI.6. God offers only mercy. 2 Your words should reflect only mercy, because that is what you
T-3.VI.7. I have spoken of different symptoms, and at that level there is almost endless variation. 2
T-3.VI.8. The issue of authority is really a question of authorship. 2 When you have an authority
T-3.VI.9. Only those who give over all desire to reject can know that their own rejection is
T-3.VI.10. Peace is a natural heritage of spirit. 2 Everyone is free to refuse to accept his inheritance,
T-3.VI.11. There is no one who does not feel that he is imprisoned in some way. 2 If this is the
T-3.VII.1. Every system of thought must have a starting point. 2 It begins with either a making or a
T-3.VII.2. You cannot resolve the authority problem by depreciating the power of your mind. 2 To
T-3.VII.3. We have discussed the fall or separation before, but its meaning must be clearly
T-3.VII.4. Eating of the fruit of the tree of knowledge is a symbolic expression for usurping the
T-3.VII.5. The mind can make the belief in separation very real and very fearful, and this belief is
T-3.VII.6. The branch that bears no fruit will be cut off and will wither away. 2 Be glad! 3 The light
T-4.in.1. The Bible says that you should go with a brother twice as far as he asks. 2 It certainly does
T-4.in.2. You can speak from the spirit or from the ego, as you choose. 2 If you speak from spirit
T-4.in.3. The journey to the cross should be the last "useless journey." 2 Do not dwell upon it, but
T-4.I.1. A good teacher clarifies his own ideas and strengthens them by teaching them. 2 Teacher
T-4.I.2. Many stand guard over their ideas because they want to protect their thought systems as
T-4.I.3. Spirit need not be taught, but the ego must be. 2 Learning is ultimately perceived as
T-4.I.4. Teaching and learning are your greatest strengths now, because they enable you to change
T-4.I.5. Every good teacher hopes to give his students so much of his own learning that they will
T-4.I.6. Egos can clash in any situation, but spirit cannot clash at all. 2 If you perceive a teacher as
T-4.I.7. Your worth is not established by teaching or learning. 2 Your worth is established by God.
T-4.I.8. The ego tries to exploit all situations into forms of praise for itself in order to overcome its
T-4.I.9. God is not the author of fear. 2 You are. 3 You have chosen to create unlike Him, and have
T-4.I.10. The ego is afraid of the spirit's joy, because once you have experienced it you will
T-4.I.11. The ego has built a shabby and unsheltering home for you, because it cannot build
T-4.I.12. Of your ego you can do nothing to save yourself or others, but of your spirit you can do
T-4.I.13. I will substitute for your ego if you wish, but never for your spirit. 2 A father can safely
T-4.II.1. It is reasonable to ask how the mind could ever have made the ego. 2 In fact, it is the best
T-4.II.2. Everyone makes an ego or a self for himself, which is subject to enormous variation
T-4.II.3. Your own state of mind is a good example of how the ego was made. 2 When you threw
T-4.II.4. Think of the love of animals for their offspring, and the need they feel to protect them. 2
T-4.II.5. Undermining the ego's thought system must be perceived as painful, even though this is
T-4.II.6. Only those who have a real and lasting sense of abundance can be truly charitable. 2 This
T-4.II.7. The ego literally lives by comparisons. 2 Equality is beyond its grasp, and charity becomes
T-4.II.8. The ego believes it is completely on its own, which is merely another way of describing
T-4.II.9. Myths and magic are closely associated, since myths are usually related to ego origins, and
T-4.II.10. Salvation is nothing more than "right-mindedness," which is not the One-mindedness of
T-4.II.11. It cannot be emphasized too often that correcting perception is merely a temporary
T-4.III.1. It is hard to understand what "The Kingdom of Heaven is within you" really means. 2 This
T-4.III.2. This is written in the form of a prayer because it is useful in moments of temptation. 2 It
T-4.III.3. It is surely apparent by now why the ego regards spirit as its "enemy." 2 The ego arose
T-4.III.4. You who identify with your ego cannot believe God loves you. 2 You do not love what
T-4.III.5. There is a kind of experience so different from anything the ego can offer that you will
T-4.III.6. No force except your own will is strong enough or worthy enough to guide you. 2 In this
T-4.III.7. It has never really entered your mind to give up every idea you ever had that opposes
T-4.III.8. Watch carefully and see what it is you are really asking for. 2 Be very honest with
T-4.III.9. In your own mind, though denied by the ego, is the declaration of your release. 2 God has
T-4.III.10. The calm being of God's Kingdom, which in your sane mind is perfectly conscious, is
T-4.IV.1. If you cannot hear the Voice for God, it is because you do not choose to listen. 2 That you
T-4.IV.2. I have said that you cannot change your mind by changing your behavior, but I have also
T-4.IV.3. When you are sad, know this need not be . 2 Depression comes from a sense of being
T-4.IV.4. When you are anxious, realize that anxiety comes from the capriciousness of the ego, and
T-4.IV.5. When you feel guilty, remember that the ego has indeed violated the laws of God, but you
T-4.IV.6. Watch your mind for the temptations of the ego, and do not be deceived by it. 2 It offers
T-4.IV.7. The habit of engaging with God and His creations is easily made if you actively refuse to
T-4.IV.8. Have you really considered how many opportunities you have had to gladden yourself,
T-4.IV.9. You are a mirror of truth, in which God Himself shines in perfect light. 2 To the ego's
T-4.IV.10. The First Coming of Christ is merely another name for the creation, for Christ is the Son
T-4.IV.11. I do not attack your ego. 2 I do work with your higher mind, the home of the Holy Spirit,
T-4.V.1. All things work together for good. 2 There are no exceptions except in the ego's judgment.
T-4.V.2. A major source of the ego's off-balanced state is its lack of discrimination between the
T-4.V.3. Any thought system that confuses God and the body must be insane. 2 Yet this confusion
T-4.V.4. The body is the ego's home by its own election. 2 It is the only identification with which
T-4.V.5. This is the question that must be asked: "Where can I go for protection?" 2 "Seek and ye
T-4.V.6. The ego thinks it is an advantage not to commit itself to anything that is eternal, because
T-4.VI.1. The ego does not recognize the real source of "threat," and if you associate yourself with
T-4.VI.2. In learning to escape from illusions, your debt to your brother is something you must
T-4.VI.3. You have very little trust in me as yet, but it will increase as you turn more and more
T-4.VI.4. The ego and the spirit do not know each other. 2 The separated mind cannot maintain the
T-4.VI.5. How can you teach someone the value of something he has deliberately thrown away? 2
T-4.VI.6. My trust in you is greater than yours in me at the moment, but it will not always be that
T-4.VI.7. I will go with you to the Holy One, and through my perception He can bridge the little
T-4.VI.8. As you come closer to a brother you approach me, and as you withdraw from him I
T-4.VII.1. It is clear that while the content of any particular ego illusion does not matter, its
T-4.VII.2. Everything the ego perceives is a separate whole, without the relationships that imply
T-4.VII.3. In contrast, spirit reacts in the same way to everything it knows is true, and does not
T-4.VII.4. Existence as well as being rest on communication. 2 Existence, however, is specific in
T-4.VII.5. God, Who encompasses all being, created beings who have everything individually, but
T-4.VII.6. The Bible repeatedly states that you should praise God. 2 This hardly means that you
T-4.VII.7. God has kept your Kingdom for you, but He cannot share His joy with you until you
T-4.VII.8. God is praised whenever any mind learns to be wholly helpful. 2 This is impossible
T-5.in.1. To heal is to make happy. 2 I have told you to think how many opportunities you have had
T-5.in.2. To be wholehearted you must be happy. 2 If fear and love cannot coexist, and if it is
T-5.in.3. You are being blessed by every beneficent thought of any of your brothers anywhere. 2
T-5.I.1. Healing is a thought by which two minds perceive their oneness and become glad. 2 This
T-5.I.2. Let us start our process of reawakening with just a few simple concepts: 2 Thoughts
T-5.I.3. This is the invitation to the Holy Spirit. 2 I have said already that I can reach up and bring
T-5.I.4. The Holy Spirit is the only part of the Holy Trinity that has a symbolic function. 2 He is
T-5.I.5. The Holy Spirit is the Christ Mind which is aware of the knowledge that lies beyond
T-5.I.6. God honored even the miscreations of His children because they had made them. 2 But He
T-5.I.7. The Holy Spirit, the shared Inspiration of all the Sonship, induces a kind of perception in
T-5.II.1. Healing is not creating; it is reparation. 2 The Holy Spirit promotes healing by looking
T-5.II.2. The Holy Spirit is the spirit of joy. 2 He is the Call to return with which God blessed the
T-5.II.3. The principle of Atonement and the separation began at the same time. 2 When the ego
T-5.II.4. You are the Kingdom of Heaven, but you have let the belief in darkness enter your mind
T-5.II.5. God does not guide, because He can share only perfect knowledge. 2 Guidance is
T-5.II.6. The Holy Spirit calls you both to remember and to forget. 2 You have chosen to be in a
T-5.II.7. The Voice of the Holy Spirit does not command, because It is incapable of arrogance. 2 It
T-5.II.8. The Holy Spirit is your Guide in choosing. 2 He is in the part of your mind that always
T-5.II.9. My mind will always be like yours, because we were created as equals. 2 It was only my
T-5.II.10. I have assured you that the Mind that decided for me is also in you, and that you can let it
T-5.II.11. When you are tempted by the wrong voice, call on me to remind you how to heal by
T-5.II.12. I have enjoined you to behave as I behaved, but we must respond to the same Mind to do
T-5.III.1. The way to recognize your brother is by recognizing the Holy Spirit in him. 2 I have
T-5.III.2. The Holy Spirit is the idea of healing. 2 Being thought, the idea gains as it is shared. 3
T-5.III.3. There are two diametrically opposed ways of seeing your brother. 2 They must both be in
T-5.III.4. The Voice of the Holy Spirit is weak in you. 2 That is why you must share It. 3 It must be
T-5.III.5. Delay is of the ego, because time is its concept. 2 Both time and delay are meaningless in
T-5.III.6. I have repeatedly emphasized that one level of the mind is not understandable to another.
T-5.III.7. The Holy Spirit is the Mediator between the interpretations of the ego and the knowledge
T-5.III.8. You cannot understand yourself alone. 2 This is because you have no meaning apart from
T-5.III.9. Perception derives meaning from relationships. 2 Those you accept are the foundations of
T-5.III.10. The Holy Spirit is the perfect Teacher. 2 He uses only what your mind already
T-5.III.11. The ego made the world as it perceives it, but the Holy Spirit, the reinterpreter of what
T-5.IV.1. What fear has hidden still is part of you. 2 Joining the Atonement is the way out of fear. 3
T-5.IV.2. What the ego makes it keeps to itself, and so it is without strength. 2 Its existence is
T-5.IV.3. Every loving thought held in any part of the Sonship belongs to every part. 2 It is shared
T-5.IV.4. I heard one Voice because I understood that I could not atone for myself alone. 2
T-5.IV.5. Teaching is done in many ways, above all by example. 2 Teaching should be healing,
T-5.IV.6. The Holy Spirit atones in all of us by undoing, and thus lifts the burden you have placed
T-5.IV.7. The Atonement gives you the power of a healed mind, but the power to create is of God. 2
T-5.IV.8. How can you who are so holy suffer? 2 All your past except its beauty is gone, and
T-5.V.1. Perhaps some of our concepts will become clearer and more personally meaningful if the
T-5.V.2. In Heaven there is no guilt, because the Kingdom is attained through the Atonement, which
T-5.V.3. The ego is the part of the mind that believes in division. 2 How could part of God detach
T-5.V.4. Whatever you accept into your mind has reality for you. 2 It is your acceptance of it that
T-5.V.5. The guiltless mind cannot suffer. 2 Being sane, the mind heals the body because it has been
T-5.V.6. The ego cannot oppose the laws of God any more than you can, but it can interpret them
T-5.V.7. Irrational thought is disordered thought. 2 God Himself orders your thought because your
T-5.V.8. The continuing decision to remain separated is the only possible reason for continuing guilt
T-5.VI.1. God in His knowledge is not waiting, but His Kingdom is bereft while you wait. 2 All the
T-5.VI.2. Guilt feelings are the preservers of time. 2 They induce fears of retaliation or
T-5.VI.3. Remember the Kingdom always, and remember that you who are part of the Kingdom
T-5.VI.4. The ego speaks in judgment, and the Holy Spirit reverses its decision, much as a higher
T-5.VI.5. There are many examples of how the ego's interpretations are misleading, but a few will
T-5.VI.6. "As ye sow, so shall ye reap" He interprets to mean what you consider worth cultivating
T-5.VI.7. "Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord" is easily reinterpreted if you remember that ideas
T-5.VI.8. "I will visit the sins of the fathers unto the third and fourth generation," as interpreted by
T-5.VI.9. "The wicked shall perish" becomes a statement of Atonement, if the word "perish" is
T-5.VI.10. You need not fear the Higher Court will condemn you. 2 It will merely dismiss the case
T-5.VI.11. When I said "I am come as a light into the world," I meant that I came to share the light
T-5.VI.12. Now you must learn that only infinite patience produces immediate effects. 2 This is the
T-5.VII.1. Do you really believe you can make a voice that can drown out God's? 2 Do you really
T-5.VII.2. There have been many healers who did not heal themselves. 2 They have not moved
T-5.VII.3. Why should you listen to the endless insane calls you think are made upon you, when you
T-5.VII.4. But the time is now. 2 You have not been asked to work out the plan of salvation
T-5.VII.5. Whenever you are not wholly joyous, it is because you have reacted with a lack of love
T-5.VII.6. Decision cannot be difficult. 2 This is obvious, if you realize that you must already have
T-6.in.1. The relationship of anger to attack is obvious, but the relationship of anger to fear is not
T-6.in.2. You have been asked to take me as your model for learning, since an extreme example is a
T-6.I.1. For learning purposes, let us consider the crucifixion again. 2 I did not dwell on it before
T-6.I.3. You have probably reacted for years as if you were being crucified. 2 This is a marked
T-6.I.4. Assault can ultimately be made only on the body. 2 There is little doubt that one body can
T-6.I.5. I have made it perfectly clear that I am like you and you are like me, but our fundamental
T-6.I.6. As I have said before, "As you teach so shall you learn." 2 If you react as if you are
T-6.I.7. Your resurrection is your reawakening. 2 I am the model for rebirth, but rebirth itself is
T-6.I.8. I am sorry when my brothers do not share my decision to hear only one Voice, because it
T-6.I.9. I elected, for your sake and mine, to demonstrate that the most outrageous assault, as
T-6.I.10. We are still equal as learners, although we do not need to have equal experiences. 2 The
T-6.I.11. You are not persecuted, nor was I. 2 You are not asked to repeat my experiences because
T-6.I.12. The crucifixion cannot be shared because it is the symbol of projection, but the
T-6.I.13. The message of the crucifixion is perfectly clear: 2 Teach only love, for that is what you
T-6.I.14. If you interpret the crucifixion in any other way, you are using it as a weapon for assault
T-6.I.15. These are some of the examples of upside-down thinking in the New Testament, although
T-6.I.16. As you read the teachings of the Apostles, remember that I told them myself that there was
T-6.I.17. I do not need gratitude, but you need to develop your weakened ability to be grateful, or
T-6.I.18. The power of the Sons of God is present all the time, because they were created as
T-6.I.19. Remember that the Holy Spirit is the Communication Link between God the Father and
T-6.II.1. Any split in mind must involve a rejection of part of it, and this is the belief in separation.
T-6.II.2. What you project you disown, and therefore do not believe is yours. 2 You are excluding
T-6.II.3. Yet projection will always hurt you. 2 It reinforces your belief in your own split mind, and
T-6.II.4. We have learned, however, that there is an alternative to projection. 2 Every ability of the
T-6.II.5. The Holy Spirit begins by perceiving you as perfect. 2 Knowing this perfection is shared
T-6.II.6. How else can you find joy in a joyless place except by realizing that you are not there? 2
T-6.II.7. The perfect equality of the Holy Spirit's perception is the reflection of the perfect equality
T-6.II.8. God created His Sons by extending His Thought, and retaining the extensions of His
T-6.II.9. Thoughts begin in the mind of the thinker, from which they reach outward. 2 This is as
T-6.II.10. The Holy Spirit uses time, but does not believe in it. 2 Coming from God He uses
T-6.II.11. The ego can accept the idea that return is necessary because it can so easily make the idea
T-6.II.12. The difference between the ego's projection and the Holy Spirit's extension is very simple.
T-6.II.13. The Holy Spirit was given you with perfect impartiality, and only by recognizing Him
T-6.III.1. As we have already emphasized, every idea begins in the mind of the thinker. 2 Therefore,
T-6.III.2. That is why you must teach only one lesson. 2 If you are to be conflict-free yourself, you
T-6.III.3. The only safety lies in extending the Holy Spirit, because as you see His gentleness in
T-6.III.4. Since you cannot not teach, your salvation lies in teaching the exact opposite of
T-6.IV.1. Remember that the Holy Spirit is the Answer, not the question. 2 The ego always speaks
T-6.IV.2. When God created you He made you part of Him. 2 That is why attack within the
T-6.IV.3. You cannot understand the conflict until you fully understand the basic fact that the ego
T-6.IV.4. The ego cannot hear the Holy Spirit, but it does believe that part of the mind that made it
T-6.IV.5. The ego uses the body to conspire against your mind, and because the ego realizes that its
T-6.IV.6. Hear, then, the one answer of the Holy Spirit to all the questions the ego raises: You are a
T-6.IV.7. In the Kingdom, where you are and what you are is perfectly certain. 2 There is no doubt,
T-6.IV.8. The introduction of abilities into being was the beginning of uncertainty, because abilities
T-6.IV.9. Abilities must be developed before you can use them. 2 This is not true of anything that
T-6.IV.10. You are in an impossible situation only because you think it is possible to be in one. 2
T-6.IV.11. That is why the Holy Spirit never commands. 2 To command is to assume inequality,
T-6.IV.12. God does not teach. 2 To teach is to imply a lack, which God knows is not there. 3 God
T-6.V.1. Like any good teacher, the Holy Spirit knows more than you do now, but He teaches only
T-6.V.2. How can you wake children in a more kindly way than by a gentle Voice that will not
T-6.V.3. A wise teacher teaches through approach, not avoidance. 2 He does not emphasize what
T-6.V.4. The Holy Spirit never itemizes errors because He does not frighten children, and those who
T-6.V.A.1. When your body and your ego and your dreams are gone, you will know that you will
T-6.V.A.2. God did not make the body, because it is destructible, and therefore not of the Kingdom.
T-6.V.A.3. I have said that the Holy Spirit is the motivation for miracles. 2 He always tells you that
T-6.V.A.4. To the Holy Spirit, there is no order of difficulty in miracles. 2 This is familiar enough
T-6.V.A.5. The Holy Spirit, Who leads to God, translates communication into being, just as He
T-6.V.A.6. This is a very preliminary step, and the only one you must take for yourself. 2 It is not
T-6.V. B.1 To Have Peace, Teach Peace to Learn It. All who believe in separation have a basic fear
T-6.V.B.2. All good teachers realize that only fundamental change will last, but they do not begin at
T-6.V.B.3. The first step in the reversal or undoing process is the undoing of the getting concept. 2
T-6.V.B.4. Upside down as always, the ego perceives the first lesson as insane. 2 In fact, this is its
T-6.V.B.5. The way out of conflict between two opposing thought systems is clearly to choose one
T-6.V.B.6. There can be no conflict between sanity and insanity. 2 Only one is true, and therefore
T-6.V.B.7. You are not asked to make insane decisions, although you can think you are. 2 It must,
T-6.V.B.8. This is still a preliminary step, since having and being are still not equated. 2 It is,
T-6.V.B.9. The second step, then, is still perceptual, although it is a giant step toward the unified
T-6.V. C.1 Be Vigilant Only for God and His Kingdom We said before that the Holy Spirit is
T-6.V.C.2. The Holy Spirit does not teach you to judge others, because He does not want you to
T-6.V.C.3. This is a major step toward fundamental change. 2 Yet it still has an aspect of thought
T-6.V.C.4. While the first step seems to increase conflict and the second may still entail conflict to
T-6.V.C.5. Choosing through the Holy Spirit will lead you to the Kingdom. 2 You create by your
T-6.V.C.6. You learn first that having rests on giving, and not on getting. 2 Next you learn that you
T-6.V.C.7. The third step is thus one of protection for your mind, allowing you to identify only with
T-6.V.C.8. To teach the whole Sonship without exception demonstrates that you perceive its
T-6.V.C.9. Truth is without illusions and therefore within the Kingdom. 2 Everything outside the
T-6.V.C.10. The third step, then, is a statement of what you want to believe, and entails a
T-7.I.1. The creative power of God and His creations is limitless, but they are not in reciprocal
T-7.I.2. If you created God and He created you, the Kingdom could not increase through its own
T-7.I.3. Your creations belong in you, as you belong in God. 2 You are part of God, as your sons
T-7.I.4. The ego, on the other hand, always demands reciprocal rights, because it is competitive
T-7.I.5. I gave only love to the Kingdom because I believed that was what I was. 2 What you
T-7.I.6. To think like God is to share His certainty of what you are, and to create like Him is to
T-7.I.7. God does not take steps, because His accomplishments are not gradual. 2 He does not teach,
T-7.II.1. To heal is the only kind of thinking in this world that resembles the Thought of God, and
T-7.II.2. To heal, then, is to correct perception in your brother and yourself by sharing the Holy
T-7.II.3. Outside the Kingdom, the law that prevails inside is adapted to "What you project you
T-7.II.4. Laws must be communicated if they are to be helpful. 2 In effect, they must be translated
T-7.II.5. The Holy Spirit's purpose in translating is exactly the opposite. 2 He translates only to
T-7.II.6. No one questions the connection of learning and memory. 2 Learning is impossible without
T-7.II.7. What can the perfect consistency of the Kingdom mean to those who are confused? 2 It is
T-7.III.1. The Holy Spirit teaches one lesson, and applies it to all individuals in all situations. 2
T-7.III.2. God's meaning waits in the Kingdom, because that is where He placed it. 2 It does not
T-7.III.3. I said before that the ego's friend is not part of you, because the ego perceives itself at war
T-7.III.4. To be in the Kingdom is merely to focus your full attention on it. 2 As long as you believe
T-7.III.5. God has lit your mind Himself, and keeps your mind lit by His light because His light is
T-7.IV.1. Truth can only be recognized and need only be recognized. 2 Inspiration is of the Holy
T-7.IV.2. The Holy Spirit must work through you to teach you He is in you. 2 This is an
T-7.IV.3. The ego does not want to teach everyone all it has learned, because that would defeat its
T-7.IV.4. All abilities should therefore be given over to the Holy Spirit, Who understands how to
T-7.IV.5. The ego's goal is as unified as the Holy Spirit's, and it is because of this that their goals
T-7.IV.6. To think you can oppose the Will of God is a real delusion. 2 The ego believes that it can,
T-7.IV.7. Seek ye first the Kingdom of Heaven, because that is where the laws of God operate truly,
T-7.V.1. The body is nothing more than a framework for developing abilities, which is quite apart
T-7.V.2. Only minds communicate. 2 Since the ego cannot obliterate the impulse to communicate
T-7.V.3. Healing is the one ability everyone can develop and must develop if he is to be healed. 2
T-7.V.4. Healing only strengthens. 2 Magic always tries to weaken. 3 Healing perceives nothing in
T-7.V.5. The Holy Spirit does not work by chance, and healing that is of Him always works. 2
T-7.V.6. Fear does not gladden. 2 Healing does. 3 Fear always makes exceptions. 4 Healing never
T-7.V.7. The unhealed healer wants gratitude from his brothers, but he is not grateful to them. 2
T-7.V.8. When you heal, that is exactly what you are learning. 2 You are recognizing the
T-7.V.9. As you can hear two voices, so you can see in two ways. 2 One way shows you an image,
T-7.V.10. You cannot forget the Father because I am with you, and I cannot forget Him. 2 To forget
T-7.V.11. Come therefore unto me, and learn of the truth in you. 2 The mind we share is shared by
T-7.VI.1. Although you can love the Sonship only as one, you can perceive it as fragmented. 2 It is
T-7.VI.2. The mind that accepts attack cannot love. 2 That is because it believes it can destroy love,
T-7.VI.3. The ingeniousness of the ego to preserve itself is enormous, but it stems from the very
T-7.VI.4. The ego cannot afford to know anything. 2 Knowledge is total, and the ego does not
T-7.VI.5. The ego therefore opposes all appreciation, all recognition, all sane perception and all
T-7.VI.6. The Holy Spirit undoes illusions without attacking them, because He cannot perceive them
T-7.VI.7. If you will keep in mind what the Holy Spirit offers you, you cannot be vigilant for
T-7.VI.8. I have repeatedly emphasized that the ego does believe it can attack God, and tries to
T-7.VI.9. Your mind is dividing its allegiance between two kingdoms, and you are totally
T-7.VI.10. You can be perceived with meaning only by the Holy Spirit because your being is the
T-7.VI.11. Perceived without your part in it, God's creation is seen as weak, and those who see
T-7.VI.12. Allowing insanity to enter your mind means that you have not judged sanity as wholly
T-7.VI.13. In this depressing state the Holy Spirit reminds you gently that you are sad because you
T-7.VII.1. Whenever you deny a blessing to a brother you will feel deprived, because denial is as
T-7.VII.2. When a brother acts insanely, he is offering you an opportunity to bless him. 2 His need
T-7.VII.3. You do not need God's blessing because that you have forever, but you do need yours. 2
T-7.VII.4. Illusions are investments. 2 They will last as long as you value them. 3 Values are
T-7.VII.5. The gift of life is yours to give, because it was given you. 2 You are unaware of your gift
T-7.VII.6. Only honor is a fitting gift for those whom God Himself created worthy of honor, and
T-7.VII.7. One child of God is the only teacher sufficiently worthy to teach another. 2 One Teacher
T-7.VII.8. Attack could never promote attack unless you perceived it as a means of depriving you of
T-7.VII.9. Being the part of your mind that does not believe it is responsible for itself, and being
T-7.VII.10. You are the Will of God. 2 Do not accept anything else as your will, or you are denying
T-7.VII.11. Perceive any part of the ego's thought system as wholly insane, wholly delusional and
T-7.VIII.1. We have said that without projection there can be no anger, but it is also true that
T-7.VIII.2. The ego's use of projection must be fully understood before the inevitable association
T-7.VIII.3. There are two major errors involved in this attempt. 2 First, strictly speaking, conflict
T-7.VIII.4. You cannot perpetuate an illusion about another without perpetuating it about yourself. 2
T-7.VIII.5. Do not be afraid of the ego. 2 It depends on your mind, and as you made it by believing
T-7.VIII.6. The Holy Spirit will teach you to perceive beyond your belief, because truth is beyond
T-7.VIII.7. The whole purpose of this course is to teach you that the ego is unbelievable and will
T-7.IX.1. Only you can limit your creative power, but God wills to release it. 2 He no more wills
T-7.IX.2. Spirit knows that the awareness of all its brothers is included in its own, as it is included
T-7.IX.3. The extension of God's Being is spirit's only function. 2 Its fullness cannot be contained,
T-7.IX.4. The Kingdom is forever extending because it is in the Mind of God. 2 You do not know
T-7.IX.5. Your creations are protected for you because the Holy Spirit, Who is in your mind, knows
T-7.IX.6. You have not failed to increase the inheritance of the Sons of God, and thus have not
T-7.IX.7. Be confident that you have never lost your Identity and the extensions which maintain It
T-7.X.1. The Kingdom is the result of premises, just as this world is. 2 You may have carried the
T-7.X.2. It is surely clear that you can both accept into your mind what is not there, and deny what
T-7.X.3. The Holy Spirit will direct you only so as to avoid pain. 2 Surely no one would object to
T-7.X.4. That is why you need to demonstrate the obvious to yourself. 2 It is not obvious to you. 3
T-7.X.5. The Holy Spirit always sides with you and with your strength. 2 As long as you avoid His
T-7.X.6. The Holy Spirit is perfectly trustworthy, as you are. 2 God Himself trusts you, and
T-7.X.7. Even the relinquishment of your false decision-making prerogative, which the ego guards
T-7.X.8. Miracles are in accord with the Will of God, Whose Will you do not know because you are
T-7.XI.1. The Holy Spirit will always guide you truly, because your joy is His. 2 This is His Will
T-7.XI.2. Grace is the natural state of every Son of God. 2 When he is not in a state of grace, he is
T-7.XI.3. Consider the kingdom you have made and judge its worth fairly. 2 Is it worthy to be a
T-7.XI.4. I call upon you to remember that I have chosen you to teach the Kingdom to the
T-7.XI.5. When a mind has only light, it knows only light. 2 Its own radiance shines all around it,
T-7.XI.6. Out of your natural environment you may well ask, "What is truth?" since truth is the
T-7.XI.7. You cannot deny part of truth. 2 You do not know your creations because you do not
T-8.I.1. Knowledge is not the motivation for learning this course. 2 Peace is. 3 This is the
T-8.I.2. The distractions of the ego may seem to interfere with your learning, but the ego has no
T-8.I.3. Every response to the ego is a call to war, and war does deprive you of peace. 2 Yet in this
T-8.I.4. Your past learning must have taught you the wrong things, simply because it has not made
T-8.I.5. The curriculum of the Atonement is the opposite of the curriculum you have established for
T-8.I.6. The total senselessness of such a curriculum must be fully recognized before a real change
T-8.II.1. There is a rationale for choice. 2 Only one Teacher knows what your reality is. 3 If
T-8.II.2. Is there any possible reason for choosing a teacher such as this? 2 Does the total disregard
T-8.II.3. The ego cannot teach you anything as long as your will is free, because you will not listen
T-8.II.4. The ego tries to teach that you want to oppose God's Will. 2 This unnatural lesson cannot
T-8.II.5. We have said that the Holy Spirit teaches you the difference between pain and joy. 2 That
T-8.II.6. The Holy Spirit's teaching takes only one direction and has only one goal. 2 His direction
T-8.II.7. When I said, "All power and glory are yours because the Kingdom is His," this is what I
T-8.II.8. To what else except all power and glory can the Holy Spirit appeal to restore God's
T-8.III.1. Glory to God in the highest, and to you because He has so willed it. 2 Ask and it shall be
T-8.III.2. To fulfill the Will of God perfectly is the only joy and peace that can be fully known,
T-8.III.3. The Will of the Father and of the Son are One, by Their extension. 2 Their extension is the
T-8.III.4. When you meet anyone, remember it is a holy encounter. 2 As you see him you will see
T-8.III.5. The goal of the curriculum, regardless of the teacher you choose, is "Know thyself." 2
T-8.III.6. The Kingdom cannot be found alone, and you who are the Kingdom cannot find yourself
T-8.III.7. You can encounter only part of yourself because you are part of God, Who is everything.
T-8.III.8. Power and glory belong to God alone. 2 So do you. 3 God gives whatever belongs to Him
T-8.IV.1. If God's Will for you is complete peace and joy, unless you experience only this you must
T-8.IV.2. I am come as a light into a world that does deny itself everything. 2 It does this simply by
T-8.IV.3. You were in darkness until God's Will was done completely by any part of the Sonship. 2
T-8.IV.4. Do you not think the world needs peace as much as you do? 2 Do you not want to give it
T-8.IV.5. Healing reflects our joint will. 2 This is obvious when you consider what healing is for. 3
T-8.IV.6. Nothing God created can oppose your decision, as nothing God created can oppose His
T-8.IV.7. If your will were not mine it would not be our Father's. 2 This would mean you have
T-8.IV.8. Freedom is the only gift you can offer to God's Sons, being an acknowledgment of what
T-8.V.1. Can you be separated from your identification and be at peace? 2 Dissociation is not a
T-8.V.2. The undivided will of the Sonship is the perfect creator, being wholly in the likeness of
T-8.V.3. God's Oneness and ours are not separate, because His Oneness encompasses ours. 2 To
T-8.V.4. When you unite with me you are uniting without the ego, because I have renounced the
T-8.V.5. Would you know the Will of God for you? 2 Ask it of me who know it for you and you
T-8.V.6. The ego's way is not mine, but it is also not yours. 2 The Holy Spirit has one direction for
T-8.VI.1. We are the joint will of the Sonship, whose Wholeness is for all. 2 We begin the journey
T-8.VI.2. The world can add nothing to the power and the glory of God and His holy Sons, but it
T-8.VI.3. Let us glorify Him Whom the world denies, for over His Kingdom the world has no
T-8.VI.4. Listen to the story of the prodigal son, and learn what God's treasure is and yours: This
T-8.VI.5. God wants only His Son because His Son is His only treasure. 2 You want your creations
T-8.VI.6. Your function is to add to God's treasure by creating yours. 2 His Will to you is His Will
T-8.VI.7. An "unwilling will" does not mean anything, being a contradiction in terms that actually
T-8.VI.8. There is no question but one you should ever ask of yourself;--"Do I want to know my
T-8.VI.9. I share with God the knowledge of the value He puts upon you. 2 My devotion to you is
T-8.VI.10. What God has willed for you is yours. 2 He has given His Will to His treasure, whose
T-8.VII.1. Attack is always physical. 2 When attack in any form enters your mind you are equating
T-8.VII.2. Remember that the Holy Spirit interprets the body only as a means of communication. 2
T-8.VII.3. If you use the body for attack, it is harmful to you. 2 If you use it only to reach the minds
T-8.VII.4. Communication ends separation. 2 Attack promotes it. 3 The body is beautiful or ugly,
T-8.VII.5. Yet all loss comes only from your own misunderstanding. 2 Loss of any kind is
T-8.VII.6. Rejoice, then, that of yourself you can do nothing. 2 You are not of yourself. 3 He of
T-8.VII.7. The Bible says, "The Word (or thought) was made flesh." 2 Strictly speaking this is
T-8.VII.8. There is nothing so frustrating to a learner as a curriculum he cannot learn. 2 His sense
T-8.VII.9. In this world, not even the body is perceived as whole. 2 Its purpose is seen as
T-8.VII.10. Healing is the result of using the body solely for communication. 2 Since this is natural
T-8.VII.11. The removal of blocks, then, is the only way to guarantee help and healing. 2 Help and
T-8.VII.12. To communicate is to join and to attack is to separate. 2 How can you do both
T-8.VII.13. The opposite of joy is depression. 2 When your learning promotes depression instead of
T-8.VII.14. You are not limited by the body, and thought cannot be made flesh. 2 Yet mind can be
T-8.VII.15. Joy is unified purpose, and unified purpose is only God's. 2 When yours is unified it is
T-8.VII.16. Do not allow yourself to suffer from imagined results of what is not true. 2 Free your
T-8.VIII.1. Attitudes toward the body are attitudes toward attack. 2 The ego's definitions of anything
T-8.VIII.2. The body exists in a world that seems to contain two voices fighting for its possession. 2
T-8.VIII.3. It has been particularly difficult to overcome the ego's belief in the body as an end,
T-8.VIII.4. It is hard to perceive sickness as a false witness, because you do not realize that it is
T-8.VIII.5. It is still true that the body has no function of itself, because it is not an end. 2 The ego,
T-8.VIII.6. Sickness is a way of demonstrating that you can be hurt. 2 It is a witness to your frailty,
T-8.VIII.7. A learning device is not a teacher. 2 It cannot tell you how you feel. 3 You do not know
T-8.VIII.8. You might well ask how the voice of something that does not exist can be so insistent. 2
T-8.VIII.9. The Holy Spirit teaches you to use your body only to reach your brothers, so He can
T-8.IX.1. I said before that the Holy Spirit is the Answer. 2 He is the Answer to everything, because
T-8.IX.2. Wrong perception is the wish that things be as they are not. 2 The reality of everything is
T-8.IX.3. Wholeness heals because it is of the mind. 2 All forms of sickness, even unto death, are
T-8.IX.4. How you wake is the sign of how you have used sleep. 2 To whom did you give it? 3
T-8.IX.5. Healing is release from the fear of waking and the substitution of the decision to wake. 2
T-8.IX.6. The ego, which always wants to weaken the mind, tries to separate it from the body in an
T-8.IX.7. The Bible enjoins you to be perfect, to heal all errors, to take no thought of the body as
T-8.IX.8. You have surely begun to realize that this is a very practical course, and one that means
T-8.IX.9. The unification of purpose, then, is the Holy Spirit's only way of healing. 2 This is
T-9.I.1. Fear of the Will of God is one of the strangest beliefs the human mind has ever made. 2 It
T-9.I.2. Your will is not the ego's, and that is why the ego is against you. 2 What seems to be the
T-9.I.3. If you do not know what your reality is, why would you be so sure that it is fearful? 2 The
T-9.I.4. You have imprisoned your will beyond your own awareness, where it remains, but cannot
T-9.I.5. I have emphasized many times that the Holy Spirit will never call upon you to sacrifice
T-9.I.6. It is impossible to communicate in alien tongues. 2 You and your Creator can communicate
T-9.I.7. You may insist that the Holy Spirit does not answer you, but it might be wiser to consider
T-9.I.8. No right mind can believe that its will is stronger than God's. 2 If, then, a mind believes that
T-9.I.9. Ultimately everyone must remember the Will of God, because ultimately everyone must
T-9.I.10. When you ask the Holy Spirit for what would hurt you He cannot answer because nothing
T-9.I.11. You do not recognize the enormous waste of energy you expend in denying truth. 2 What
T-9.I.12. Any attempt to deny what is must be fearful, and if the attempt is strong it will induce
T-9.I.13. God in His devotion to you created you devoted to everything, and gave you what you are
T-9.I.14. Remember, then, that God's Will is already possible, and nothing else will ever be. 2 This
T-9.II.1. Everyone who ever tried to use prayer to ask for something has experienced what appears
T-9.II.2. Let us suppose, then, that what you ask of the Holy Spirit is what you really want, but you
T-9.II.3. The Bible emphasizes that all prayer is answered, and this is indeed true. 2 The very fact
T-9.II.4. If you would know your prayers are answered, never doubt a Son of God. 2 Do not
T-9.II.5. The message your brother gives you is up to you. 2 What does he say to you? 3 What
T-9.II.6. You can no more pray for yourself alone than you can find joy for yourself alone. 2 Prayer
T-9.II.7. I love you for the truth in you, as God does. 2 Your deceptions may deceive you, but they
T-9.II.8. Believe in your brothers because I believe in you, and you will learn that my belief in you
T-9.II.9. To disbelieve is to side against, or to attack. 2 To believe is to accept, and to side with. 3
T-9.II.10. If paying is equated with getting, you will set the price low but demand a high return. 2
T-9.II.11. Never forget, then, that you set the value on what you receive, and price it by what you
T-9.II.12. You can ask of the Holy Spirit, then, only by giving to Him, and you can give to Him
T-9.III.1. The alertness of the ego to the errors of other egos is not the kind of vigilance the Holy
T-9.III.2. To the ego it is kind and right and good to point out errors and "correct" them. 2 This
T-9.III.3. If you point out the errors of your brother's ego you must be seeing through yours,
T-9.III.4. When you react at all to errors, you are not listening to the Holy Spirit. 2 He has merely
T-9.III.5. When a brother behaves insanely, you can heal him only by perceiving the sanity in him.
T-9.III.6. You cannot correct yourself. 2 Is it possible, then, for you to correct another? 3 Yet you
T-9.III.7. Your brother's errors are not of him, any more than yours are of you. 2 Accept his errors
T-9.III.8. The Holy Spirit forgives everything because God created everything. 2 Do not undertake
T-9.IV.1. Atonement is for all, because it is the way to undo the belief that anything is for you alone.
T-9.IV.2. You have a part to play in the Atonement, but the plan of the Atonement is beyond you. 2
T-9.IV.3. The Atonement is a lesson in sharing, which is given you because you have forgotten how
T-9.IV.4. The ego, too, has a plan of forgiveness because you are asking for one, though not of the
T-9.IV.5. Forgiveness that is learned of me does not use fear to undo fear. 2 Nor does it make real
T-9.IV.6. Follow the Holy Spirit's teaching in forgiveness, then, because forgiveness is His function
T-9.IV.7. The confusion of functions is so typical of the ego that you should be quite familiar with it
T-9.IV.8. If you have no idea what is happening, how appropriately can you expect to react? 2 You
T-9.IV.9. The ego literally lives on borrowed time, and its days are numbered. 2 Do not fear the
T-9.IV.10. What can be fearful but fantasy, and who turns to fantasy unless he despairs of finding
T-9.IV.11. The impossible can happen only in fantasy. 2 When you search for reality in fantasies
T-9.IV.12. Behold, my child, reality is here. 2 It belongs to you and me and God, and is perfectly
T-9.V.1. The ego's plan for forgiveness is far more widely used than God's. 2 This is because it is
T-9.V.2. I have repeatedly said that beliefs of the ego cannot be shared, and this is why they are
T-9.V.3. There is an advantage to bringing nightmares into awareness, but only to teach that they
T-9.V.4. Some newer forms of the ego's plan are as unhelpful as the older ones, because form does
T-9.V.5. If the way to counteract fear is to reduce the importance of the mind, how can this build
T-9.V.6. What, then, should happen? 2 When God said, "Let there be light," there was light. 3 Can
T-9.V.7. Both forms of the ego's approach, then, must arrive at an impasse; the characteristic
T-9.V.8. A therapist does not heal; he lets healing be. 2 He can point to darkness but he cannot
T-9.V.9. This course offers a very direct and a very simple learning situation, and provides the
T-9.VI.1. How can you become increasingly aware of the Holy Spirit in you except by His effects?
T-9.VI.2. It seems to you that the Holy Spirit does not produce joy consistently in you only because
T-9.VI.3. If your brothers are part of you, will you accept them? 2 Only they can teach you what
T-9.VI.4. God is more than you only because He created you, but not even this would He keep from
T-9.VI.5. You are not yet awake, but you can learn how to awaken. 2 Very simply, the Holy Spirit
T-9.VI.6. Miracles have no place in eternity, because they are reparative. 2 Yet while you still need
T-9.VI.7. Eternity is one time, its only dimension being "always." 2 This cannot mean anything to
T-9.VII.1. God's Will is your salvation. 2 Would He not have given you the means to find it? 3 If
T-9.VII.2. Consider, then, that in this joint will you are all united, and in this only. 2 There may be
T-9.VII.3. It is perfectly obvious that if the Holy Spirit looks with love on all He perceives, He looks
T-9.VII.4. You, then, have two conflicting evaluations of yourself in your mind, and they cannot
T-9.VII.5. If you choose to see yourself as unloving you will not be happy. 2 You are condemning
T-9.VII.6. You cannot evaluate an insane belief system from within it. 2 Its range precludes this. 3
T-9.VII.7. I have said that the ego does not know what a real question is. 2 Lack of knowledge of
T-9.VII.8. Whenever you question your value, say: 2 God Himself is incomplete without me. 3
T-9.VIII.1. Grandeur is of God, and only of Him. 2 Therefore it is in you. 3 Whenever you become
T-9.VIII.2. Grandiosity is always a cover for despair. 2 It is without hope because it is not real. 3 It
T-9.VIII.3. The ego does not understand the difference between grandeur and grandiosity, because it
T-9.VIII.4. The ego is immobilized in the presence of God's grandeur, because His grandeur
T-9.VIII.5. From your grandeur you can only bless, because your grandeur is your abundance. 2 By
T-9.VIII.6. The ego depends solely on your willingness to tolerate it. 2 If you are willing to look
T-9.VIII.7. Truth and littleness are denials of each other because grandeur is truth. 2 Truth does not
T-9.VIII.8. It is easy to distinguish grandeur from grandiosity, because love is returned and pride is
T-9.VIII.9. Can your grandeur be arrogant when God Himself witnesses to it? 2 And what can be
T-9.VIII.10. You are altogether irreplaceable in the Mind of God. 2 No one else can fill your part in
T-9.VIII.11. Yet if truth is indivisible, your evaluation of yourself must be God's. 2 You did not
T-10.in.1. Nothing beyond yourself can make you fearful or loving, because nothing is beyond you.
T-10.in.2. God created nothing beside you and nothing beside you exists, for you are part of Him. 2
T-10.in.3. God does not change His Mind about you, for He is not uncertain of Himself. 2 And what
T-10.I.1. You do not know your creations simply because you would decide against them as long as
T-10.I.2. You are at home in God, dreaming of exile but perfectly capable of awakening to reality. 2
T-10.I.3. Would you bother to reconcile what happened in conflicting dreams, or would you dismiss
T-10.I.4. You will remember everything the instant you desire it wholly, for if to desire wholly is to
T-10.II.1. Unless you first know something you cannot dissociate it. 2 Knowledge must precede
T-10.II.2. Yet to give up the dissociation of reality brings more than merely lack of fear. 2 In this
T-10.II.3. To remember is merely to restore to your mind what is already there. 2 You do not make
T-10.II.4. When you attack, you are denying yourself. 2 You are specifically teaching yourself that
T-10.II.5. All attack is Self attack. 2 It cannot be anything else. 3 Arising from your own decision
T-10.II.6. If you realized the complete havoc this makes of your peace of mind you could not make
T-10.III.1. You have not attacked God and you do love Him. 2 Can you change your reality? 3 No
T-10.III.2. What Comforter can there be for the sick children of God except His power through you?
T-10.III.3. To believe that a Son of God can be sick is to believe that part of God can suffer. 2 Love
T-10.III.4. To believe a Son of God is sick is to worship the same idol he does. 2 God created love,
T-10.III.5. Look calmly at the logical conclusion of the ego's thought system and judge whether its
T-10.III.6. There are no idolaters in the Kingdom, but there is great appreciation for everything that
T-10.III.7. When a brother is sick it is because he is not asking for peace, and therefore does not
T-10.III.8. I do not bring God's message with deception, and you will learn this as you learn that you
T-10.III.9. Very simply, then, you may believe you are afraid of nothingness, but you are really
T-10.III.10. If God has but one Son, there is but one God. 2 You share reality with Him, because
T-10.III.11. Only at the altar of God will you find peace. 2 And this altar is in you because God put
T-10.IV.1. All magic is an attempt at reconciling the irreconcilable. 2 All religion is the recognition
T-10.IV.2. Reality can dawn only on an unclouded mind. 2 It is always there to be accepted, but its
T-10.IV.3. The Sonship cannot be perceived as partly sick, because to perceive it that way is not to
T-10.IV.4. God's laws will keep your mind at peace because peace is His Will, and His laws are
T-10.IV.5. You are not free to give up freedom, but only to deny it. 2 You cannot do what God did
T-10.IV.6. When you have experienced the protection of God, the making of idols becomes
T-10.IV.7. The miracle is the act of a Son of God who has laid aside all false gods, and calls on his
T-10.IV.8. In many only the spark remains, for the Great Rays are obscured. 2 Yet God has kept the
T-10.V.1. The rituals of the god of sickness are strange and very demanding. 2 Joy is never
T-10.V.2. Do not forget, however, that to deny God will inevitably result in projection, and you will
T-10.V.3. Allegiance to the denial of God is the ego's religion. 2 The god of sickness obviously
T-10.V.4. Sickness and death seemed to enter the mind of God's Son against His Will. 2 The "attack
T-10.V.5. I said before that of yourself you can do nothing, but you are not of yourself. 2 If you
T-10.V.6. Son of God, you have not sinned, but you have been much mistaken. 2 Yet this can be
T-10.V.7. Your Father has not denied you. 2 He does not retaliate, but He does call to you to return.
T-10.V.8. Do not look to the god of sickness for healing but only to the God of love, for healing is
T-10.V.9. Only the eternal can be loved, for love does not die. 2 What is of God is His forever, and
T-10.V.10. You do not realize how much you have denied yourself, and how much God, in His
T-10.V.11. Out of your gifts to Him the Kingdom will be restored to His Son. 2 His Son removed
T-10.V.12. If God knows His children as wholly sinless, it is blasphemous to perceive them as
T-10.V.13. Do not perceive anything God did not create or you are denying Him. 2 His is the only
T-10.V.14. Arrogance is the denial of love, because love shares and arrogance withholds. 2 As long
T-11.in.1. Either God or the ego is insane. 2 If you will examine the evidence on both sides fairly,
T-11.in.2. Yet what would you say to someone who believed this question really involves conflict?
T-11.in.3. You make by projection, but God creates by extension. 2 The cornerstone of God's
T-11.in.4. My brother, you are part of God and part of me. 2 When you have at last looked at the
T-11.I.1. You have learned your need of healing. 2 Would you bring anything else to the Sonship,
T-11.I.2. To be alone is to be separated from infinity, but how can this be if infinity has no end? 2
T-11.I.3. If you were not part of God, His Will would not be unified. 2 Is this conceivable? 3 Can
T-11.I.4. Waiting is possible only in time, but time has no meaning. 2 You who made delay can
T-11.I.5. The laws of the universe do not permit contradiction. 2 What holds for God holds for you.
T-11.I.6. God has given you a place in His Mind that is yours forever. 2 Yet you can keep it only by
T-11.I.7. Could any part of God be without His Love, and could any part of His Love be contained?
T-11.I.8. Yet what you will you do not know. 2 This is not strange when you realize that to deny is
T-11.I.9. The projection of the ego makes it appear as if God's Will is outside yourself, and
T-11.I.10. You cannot be happy unless you do what you will truly, and you cannot change this
T-11.I.11. You are asked to trust the Holy Spirit only because He speaks for you. 2 He is the Voice
T-11.II.1. If sickness is separation, the decision to heal and to be healed is the first step toward
T-11.II.2. Healing thus becomes a lesson in understanding, and the more you practice it the better
T-11.II.3. And denial is as total as love. 2 You cannot deny part of yourself, because the rest will
T-11.II.4. Healing is a sign that you want to make whole. 2 And this willingness opens your ears to
T-11.II.5. The Holy Spirit cannot speak to an unwelcoming host, because He will not be heard. 2
T-11.II.6. You will never rest until you know your function and fulfill it, for only in this can your
T-11.II.7. Would you be hostage to the ego or host to God? 2 You will accept only whom you
T-11.III.1. When you are weary, remember you have hurt yourself. 2 Your Comforter will rest you,
T-11.III.2. God's Son is indeed in need of comfort, for he knows not what he does, believing his
T-11.III.3. O my child, if you knew what God wills for you, your joy would be complete! 2 And
T-11.III.4. The way is not hard, but it is very different. 2 Yours is the way of pain, of which God
T-11.III.5. God hides nothing from His Son, even though His Son would hide himself. 2 Yet the Son
T-11.III.6. The children of light cannot abide in darkness, for darkness is not in them. 2 Do not be
T-11.III.7. Only God's Comforter can comfort you. 2 In the quiet of His temple, He waits to give
T-11.III.8. In your mind you can accept the whole Sonship and bless it with the light your Father
T-11.IV.1. Never forget that the Sonship is your salvation, for the Sonship is your Self. 2 As God's
T-11.IV.2. Could you try to make God homeless and know that you are at home? 2 Can the Son
T-11.IV.3. Your peace lies in its limitlessness. 2 Limit the peace you share, and your Self must be
T-11.IV.4. Only you can deprive yourself of anything. 2 Do not oppose this realization, for it is truly
T-11.IV.5. If your brothers are part of you and you blame them for your deprivation, you are
T-11.IV.6. Christ is at God's altar, waiting to welcome His Son. 2 But come wholly without
T-11.IV.7. At God's altar Christ waits for the restoration of Himself in you. 2 God knows His Son as
T-11.IV.8. Blessed is the Son of God whose radiance is of his Father, and whose glory he wills to
T-11.V.1. No one can escape from illusions unless he looks at them, for not looking is the way they
T-11.V.2. What is healing but the removal of all that stands in the way of knowledge? 2 And how
T-11.V.3. Let us begin this lesson in "ego dynamics" by understanding that the term itself does not
T-11.V.4. When we look at the ego, then, we are not considering dynamics but delusions. 2 You
T-11.V.5. Every idea has a purpose, and its purpose is always the natural outcome of what it is. 2
T-11.V.6. Yours is the independence of creation, not of autonomy. 2 Your whole creative function
T-11.V.7. The ego always attacks on behalf of separation. 2 Believing it has the power to do this it
T-11.V.8. You must recognize that the last thing the ego wishes you to realize is that you are afraid
T-11.V.9. The ego can and does allow you to regard yourself as supercilious, unbelieving,
T-11.V.10. Your recognition that whatever seems to separate you from God is only fear, regardless
T-11.V.11. If the ego's goal of autonomy could be accomplished God's purpose could be defeated,
T-11.V.12. God is as dependent on you as you are on Him, because His Autonomy encompasses
T-11.V.13. The ego analyzes; the Holy Spirit accepts. 2 The appreciation of wholeness comes only
T-11.V.14. The ego's interpretations of the laws of perception are, and would have to be, the exact
T-11.V.15. The ego makes no attempt to understand this, and it is clearly not understandable, but
T-11.V.16. Do not underestimate the appeal of the ego's demonstrations to those who would listen. 2
T-11.V.17. Would you remember the Father? 2 Accept His Son and you will remember Him. 3
T-11.V.18. Every brother you meet becomes a witness for Christ or for the ego, depending on what
T-11.VI.1. It is impossible not to believe what you see, but it is equally impossible to see what you
T-11.VI.2. Would you join in the resurrection or the crucifixion? 2 Would you condemn your
T-11.VI.3. This course is perfectly clear. 2 If you do not see it clearly, it is because you are
T-11.VI.4. I am your resurrection and your life. 2 You live in me because you live in God. 3 And
T-11.VI.5. Do not underestimate the power of the devotion of God's Son, nor the power the god he
T-11.VI.6. Resurrection must compel your allegiance gladly, because it is the symbol of joy. 2 Its
T-11.VI.7. You will not find peace until you have removed the nails from the hands of God's Son,
T-11.VI.8. You have nailed yourself to a cross, and placed a crown of thorns upon your own head. 2
T-11.VI.9. You will awaken to your own call, for the Call to awake is within you. 2 If I live in you,
T-11.VI.10. God's Son is saved. 2 Bring only this awareness to the Sonship, and you will have a
T-11.VII.1. The world as you perceive it cannot have been created by the Father, for the world is
T-11.VII.2. Every loving thought that the Son of God ever had is eternal. 2 The loving thoughts his
T-11.VII.3. The ego may see some good, but never only good. 2 That is why its perceptions are so
T-11.VII.4. The perception of goodness is not knowledge, but the denial of the opposite of
T-11.VIII.1. This is a very simple course. 2 Perhaps you do not feel you need a course which, in the
T-11.VIII.2. The Bible tells you to become as little children. 2 Little children recognize that they do
T-11.VIII.3. You do not know the meaning of anything you perceive. 2 Not one thought you hold is
T-11.VIII.4. No one can withhold truth except from himself. 2 Yet God will not refuse you the
T-11.VIII.5. You may complain that this course is not sufficiently specific for you to understand and
T-11.VIII.6. The Holy Spirit will give you only what is yours, and will take nothing in return. 2 For
T-11.VIII.7. Little child of God, you do not understand your Father. 2 You believe in a world that
T-11.VIII.8. Beautiful child of God, you are asking only for what I promised you. 2 Do you believe
T-11.VIII.9. Ask anything of God's Son and his Father will answer you, for Christ is not deceived in
T-11.VIII.10. In the real world there is no sickness, for there is no separation and no division. 2
T-11.VIII.11. Do not accept your brother's variable perception of himself for his split mind is yours,
T-11.VIII.12. If you perceive offense in a brother pluck the offense from your mind, for you are
T-11.VIII.13. Children perceive frightening ghosts and monsters and dragons, and they are terrified.
T-11.VIII.14. You, my child, are afraid of your brothers and of your Father and of yourself. 2 But
T-11.VIII.15. Would you not exchange your fears for truth, if the exchange is yours for the asking?
T-12.I.1. You have been told not to make error real, and the way to do this is very simple. 2 If you
T-12.I.2. The analysis of ego motivation is very complicated, very obscuring, and never without
T-12.I.3. There is but one interpretation of motivation that makes any sense. 2 And because it is the
T-12.I.4. There is nothing to prevent you from recognizing all calls for help as exactly what they are
T-12.I.5. It is surely good advice to tell you not to judge what you do not understand. 2 No one with
T-12.I.6. Only appreciation is an appropriate response to your brother. 2 Gratitude is due him for
T-12.I.7. Your interpretations of your brother's needs are your interpretation of yours. 2 By giving
T-12.I.8. By applying the Holy Spirit's interpretation of the reactions of others more and more
T-12.I.9. Fear is a symptom of your own deep sense of loss. 2 If when you perceive it in others you
T-12.I.10. If you would look upon love, which is the world's reality, how could you do better than to
T-12.II.1. Miracles are merely the translation of denial into truth. 2 If to love oneself is to heal
T-12.II.2. The light in them shines as brightly regardless of the density of the fog that obscures it. 2
T-12.II.3. Perceive in sickness but another call for love, and offer your brother what he believes he
T-12.II.4. Remember what was said about the frightening perceptions of little children, which terrify
T-12.II.5. Let us not save nightmares, for they are not fitting offerings for Christ, and so they are
T-12.II.6. You still want what God wills, and no nightmare can defeat a child of God in his
T-12.II.7. A little while and you will see me, for I am not hidden because you are hiding. 2 I will
T-12.II.8. There is no fear in perfect love. 2 We will but be making perfect to you what is already
T-12.II.9. You who have tried to banish love have not succeeded, but you who choose to banish fear
T-12.II.10. We are therefore embarking on an organized, well-structured and carefully planned
T-12.III.1. I once asked you to sell all you have and give to the poor and follow me. 2 This is what I
T-12.III.2. Suppose a brother insists on having you do something you think you do not want to do. 2
T-12.III.3. Whenever you become angry with a brother, for whatever reason, you are believing that
T-12.III.4. Recognize what does not matter, and if your brothers ask you for something
T-12.III.5. Salvation is for the mind, and it is attained through peace. 2 This is the only thing that
T-12.III.6. To identify with the ego is to attack yourself and make yourself poor. 2 That is why
T-12.III.7. If only the loving thoughts of God's Son are the world's reality, the real world must be in
T-12.III.8. I said before that God so loved the world that He gave it to His only begotten Son. 2 God
T-12.III.9. The world you perceive is a world of separation. 2 Perhaps you are willing to accept
T-12.III.10. If you will recognize that all the attack you perceive is in your own mind and nowhere
T-12.IV.1. The ego is certain that love is dangerous, and this is always its central teaching. 2 It
T-12.IV.2. The search the ego undertakes is therefore bound to be defeated. 2 And since it also
T-12.IV.3. It is surely obvious that no one wants to find what would utterly defeat him. 2 Being
T-12.IV.4. Do you realize that the ego must set you on a journey which cannot but lead to a sense of
T-12.IV.5. You will undertake a journey because you are not at home in this world. 2 And you will
T-12.IV.6. Behold the Guide your Father gave you, that you might learn you have eternal life. 2 For
T-12.IV.7. The Atonement is not the price of your wholeness, but it is the price of your awareness
T-12.V.1. Only love is strong because it is undivided. 2 The strong do not attack because they see no
T-12.V.2. That is why the recognition of your own invulnerability is so important to the restoration
T-12.V.3. You will never realize the utter uselessness of attack except by recognizing that your
T-12.V.4. The Holy Spirit's Love is your strength, for yours is divided and therefore not real. 2 You
T-12.V.5. You have learning handicaps in a very literal sense. 2 There are areas in your learning
T-12.V.6. You do not know the meaning of love, and that is your handicap. 2 Do not attempt to
T-12.V.7. I have said that the ego's rule is, "Seek and do not find." 2 Translated into curricular terms
T-12.V.8. You who have tried to learn what you do not want should take heart, for although the
T-12.V.9. Your learning potential, properly understood, is limitless because it will lead you to God.
T-12.VI.1. The ego is trying to teach you how to gain the whole world and lose your own soul. 2
T-12.VI.2. The Holy Spirit is your strength because He knows nothing but the spirit as you. 2 He is
T-12.VI.3. You do not want the world. 2 The only thing of value in it is whatever part of it you look
T-12.VI.4. Correction is for all who cannot see. 2 To open the eyes of the blind is the Holy Spirit's
T-12.VI.5. When you have seen this real world, as you will surely do, you will remember Us. 2 Yet
T-12.VI.6. Every child of God is one in Christ, for his being is in Christ as Christ's is in God. 2
T-12.VI.7. What is one cannot be perceived as separate, and the denial of the separation is the
T-12.VII.1. Miracles demonstrate that learning has occurred under the right guidance, for learning is
T-12.VII.2. Everyone in the world must play his part in its redemption, in order to recognize that
T-12.VII.3. The Holy Spirit is invisible, but you can see the results of His Presence, and through
T-12.VII.4. You cannot see the Holy Spirit, but you can see His manifestations. 2 And unless you
T-12.VII.5. You see what you expect, and you expect what you invite. 2 Your perception is the
T-12.VII.6. I am the manifestation of the Holy Spirit, and when you see me it will be because you
T-12.VII.7. I said before that what you project or extend is up to you, but you must do one or the
T-12.VII.8. When you want only love you will see nothing else. 2 The contradictory nature of the
T-12.VII.9. The power of decision is your one remaining freedom as a prisoner of this world. 2 You
T-12.VII.10. You are afraid of me because you looked within and are afraid of what you saw. 2 Yet
T-12.VII.11. When you have accepted your mission to extend peace you will find peace, for by
T-12.VII.12. When you look within and see me, it will be because you have decided to manifest
T-12.VII.13. Remember, then, that whenever you look without and react unfavorably to what you
T-12.VII.14. The ego is not a traitor to God, to Whom treachery is impossible. 2 But it is a traitor to
T-12.VII.15. When you are tempted to yield to the desire for death, remember that I did not die. 2
T-12.VIII.1. Do you really believe that you can kill the Son of God? 2 The Father has hidden His
T-12.VIII.2. God's Son is as safe as his Father, for the Son knows his Father's protection and cannot
T-12.VIII.3. When you made visible what is not true, what is true became invisible to you. 2 Yet it
T-12.VIII.4. Because of your Father's Love you can never forget Him, for no one can forget what
T-12.VIII.5. You have but to ask for this memory, and you will remember. 2 Yet the memory of
T-12.VIII.6. Son of God, be not content with nothing! 2 What is not real cannot be seen and has no
T-12.VIII.7. Yet it does not matter how much distance you have tried to interpose between your
T-12.VIII.8. The real world was given you by God in loving exchange for the world you made and
T-13.in.1. If you did not feel guilty you could not attack, for condemnation is the root of attack. 2 It
T-13.in.2. The acceptance of guilt into the mind of God's Son was the beginning of the separation,
T-13.in.3. If this were the real world, God would be cruel. 2 For no Father could subject His
T-13.in.4. This world is a picture of the crucifixion of God's Son. 2 And until you realize that God's
T-13.I.1. Earlier, I said that the Holy Spirit shares the goal of all good teachers, whose ultimate aim
T-13.I.2. In the strange world that you have made the Son of God has sinned. 2 How could you see
T-13.I.3. As you look upon yourself and judge what you do honestly, you may be tempted to
T-13.I.4. The journey the Son of God has set himself is useless indeed, but the journey on which his
T-13.I.5. You will see me as you learn the Son of God is guiltless. 2 He has always sought his
T-13.I.6. When you have accepted the Atonement for yourself, you will realize there is no guilt in
T-13.I.7. As you perceive the holy companions who travel with you, you will realize that there is no
T-13.I.8. You are invulnerable because you are guiltless. 2 You can hold on to the past only through
T-13.I.9. Accepting the Atonement teaches you what immortality is, for by accepting your
T-13.I.10. You cannot dispel guilt by making it real, and then atoning for it. 2 This is the ego's plan,
T-13.I.11. The ego teaches you to attack yourself because you are guilty, and this must increase the
T-13.II.1. The ultimate purpose of projection is always to get rid of guilt. 2 Yet, characteristically,
T-13.II.2. Yet consider how strange a solution the ego's arrangement is. 2 You project guilt to get
T-13.II.3. The darkest of your hidden cornerstones holds your belief in guilt from your awareness. 2
T-13.II.4. Much of the ego's strange behavior is directly attributable to its definition of guilt. 2 To
T-13.II.5. In the calm light of truth, let us recognize that you believe you have crucified God's Son.
T-13.II.6. I have said that the crucifixion is the symbol of the ego. 2 When it was confronted with
T-13.II.7. This course has explicitly stated that its goal for you is happiness and peace. 2 Yet you
T-13.II.8. The Atonement has always been interpreted as the release from guilt, and this is correct if
T-13.II.9. Little child, this is not so. 2 Your "guilty secret" is nothing, and if you will but bring it to
T-13.III.1. You may wonder why it is so crucial that you look upon your hatred and realize its full
T-13.III.2. Under the ego's dark foundation is the memory of God, and it is of this that you are
T-13.III.3. In honesty, is it not harder for you to say "I love" than "I hate"? 2 You associate love
T-13.III.4. You have built your whole insane belief system because you think you would be helpless
T-13.III.5. You can accept insanity because you made it, but you cannot accept love because you did
T-13.III.6. You must look upon your illusions and not keep them hidden, because they do not rest
T-13.III.7. And yet he is not crucified. 2 Here is both his pain and his healing, for the Holy Spirit's
T-13.III.8. Beneath all the grandiosity you hold so dear is your real call for help. 2 For you call for
T-13.III.9. Save him from his illusions that you may accept the magnitude of your Father in peace
T-13.III.10. You who prefer separation to sanity cannot obtain it in your right mind. 2 You were at
T-13.III.11. In peace he needed nothing and asked for nothing. 2 In war he demanded everything
T-13.III.12. To "single out" is to "make alone," and thus make lonely. 2 God did not do this to you.
T-13.IV.1. And now the reason why you are afraid of this course should be apparent. 2 For this is a
T-13.IV.2. Yet neither oblivion nor hell is as unacceptable to you as Heaven. 2 Your definition of
T-13.IV.3. Under the circumstances, would it not be more desirable to have been wrong, even apart
T-13.IV.4. The ego has a strange notion of time, and it is with this notion that your questioning
T-13.IV.5. "Now" has no meaning to the ego. 2 The present merely reminds it of past hurts, and it
T-13.IV.6. The shadowy figures from the past are precisely what you must escape. 2 They are not
T-13.IV.7. It is evident that the Holy Spirit's perception of time is the exact opposite of the ego's. 2
T-13.IV.8. The ego, on the other hand, regards the function of time as one of extending itself in
T-13.IV.9. You, too, will interpret the function of time as you interpret yours. 2 If you accept your
T-13.V.1. I have said you have but two emotions, love and fear. 2 One is changeless but continually
T-13.V.2. Each one peoples his world with figures from his individual past, and it is because of this
T-13.V.3. It is through these strange and shadowy figures that the insane relate to their insane world.
T-13.V.4. The delusional can be very destructive, for they do not recognize they have condemned
T-13.V.5. You have but two emotions, yet in your private world you react to each of them as
T-13.V.6. As you look with open eyes upon your world, it must occur to you that you have
T-13.V.7. Little child, would you offer this to your Father? 2 For if you offer it to yourself, you are
T-13.V.8. Vision depends on light. 2 You cannot see in darkness. 3 Yet in darkness, in the private
T-13.V.9. Do not seek vision through your eyes, for you made your way of seeing that you might
T-13.V.10. You have but two emotions, and one you made and one was given you. 2 Each is a way
T-13.V.11. The Holy Spirit is the light in which Christ stands revealed. 2 And all who would behold
T-13.VI.1. To perceive truly is to be aware of all reality through the awareness of your own. 2 But
T-13.VI.2. You consider it "natural" to use your past experience as the reference point from which
T-13.VI.3. This darkness is in you. 2 The Christ as revealed to you now has no past, for He is
T-13.VI.4. Time can release as well as imprison, depending on whose interpretation of it you use. 2
T-13.VI.5. The miracle enables you to see your brother without his past, and so perceive him as
T-13.VI.6. Judgment and condemnation are behind you, and unless you bring them with you, you
T-13.VI.7. The present offers you your brothers in the light that would unite you with them, and free
T-13.VI.8. Now is the time of salvation, for now is the release from time. 2 Reach out to all your
T-13.VI.9. Shine on your brothers in remembrance of your Creator, for you will remember Him as
T-13.VI.10. Child of Light, you know not that the light is in you. 2 Yet you will find it through its
T-13.VI.11. There is a light that this world cannot give. 2 Yet you can give it, as it was given you. 3
T-13.VI.12. Awaking unto Christ is following the laws of love of your free will, and out of quiet
T-13.VI.13. And yet the laws of love are not suspended because you sleep. 2 And you have
T-13.VII.1. Sit quietly and look upon the world you see, and tell yourself: "The real world is not
T-13.VII.2. The world you see must be denied, for sight of it is costing you a different kind of
T-13.VII.3. You do not really want the world you see, for it has disappointed you since time began.
T-13.VII.4. Yet the real world has the power to touch you even here, because you love it. 2 And
T-13.VII.5. You have been wrong about the world because you have misjudged yourself. 2 From
T-13.VII.6. No one in this distracted world but has seen some glimpses of the other world about
T-13.VII.7. It is God's Will that nothing touch His Son except Himself, and nothing else comes nigh
T-13.VII.8. The peace of God passeth your understanding only in the past. 2 Yet here it is, and you
T-13.VII.9. You will first dream of peace, and then awaken to it. 2 Your first exchange of what you
T-13.VII.10. Praise, then, the Father for the perfect sanity of His most holy Son. 2 Your Father
T-13.VII.11. Everything the ego tells you that you need will hurt you. 2 For although the ego urges
T-13.VII.12. Only the Holy Spirit knows what you need. 2 For He will give you all things that do
T-13.VII.13. Leave, then, your needs to Him. 2 He will supply them with no emphasis at all upon
T-13.VII.14. Whenever you are tempted to undertake a useless journey that would lead away from
T-13.VII.15. Then follow Him in joy, with faith that He will lead you safely through all dangers to
T-13.VII.16. In me you have already overcome every temptation that would hold you back. 2 We
T-13.VII.17. We cannot sing redemption's hymn alone. 2 My task is not completed until I have
T-13.VIII.1. All healing is release from the past. 2 That is why the Holy Spirit is the only Healer. 3
T-13.VIII.2. The very real difference between perception and knowledge becomes quite apparent if
T-13.VIII.3. Perfect perception, then, has many elements in common with knowledge, making
T-13.VIII.4. Apart from the Father and the Son, the Holy Spirit has no function. 2 He is not separate
T-13.VIII.5. This is the miracle of creation; that it is one forever. 2 Every miracle you offer to the
T-13.VIII.6. They are all the same; all beautiful and equal in their holiness. 2 And He will offer
T-13.VIII.7. Be you content with healing, for Christ's gift you can bestow, and your Father's gift
T-13.VIII.8. When you have seen your brothers as yourself you will be released to knowledge,
T-13.VIII.9. As miracles in this world join you to your brothers, so do your creations establish your
T-13.VIII.10. Yet in this world your perfection is unwitnessed. 2 God knows it, but you do not, and
T-13.IX.1. Guilt remains the only thing that hides the Father, for guilt is the attack upon His Son. 2
T-13.IX.2. Release from guilt is the ego's whole undoing. 2 Make no one fearful, for his guilt is
T-13.IX.3. The world can give you only what you gave it, for being nothing but your own
T-13.IX.4. Atonement brings a re-evaluation of everything you cherish, for it is the means by which
T-13.IX.5. Lay not his guilt upon him, for his guilt lies in his secret thought that he has done this
T-13.IX.6. See no one, then, as guilty, and you will affirm the truth of guiltlessness unto yourself. 2
T-13.IX.7. Guilt makes you blind, for while you see one spot of guilt within you, you will not see
T-13.IX.8. Do not be afraid to look within. 2 The ego tells you all is black with guilt within you,
T-13.X.1. You are accustomed to the notion that the mind can see the source of pain where it is not.
T-13.X.2. Insane ideas have no real relationships, for that is why they are insane. 2 No real
T-13.X.3. In any union with a brother in which you seek to lay your guilt upon him, or share it with
T-13.X.4. When you maintain that you are guilty but the source of your guilt lies in the past, you are
T-13.X.5. Determine, then, to be not as you were. 2 Use no relationship to hold you to the past, but
T-13.X.6. As long as you believe that guilt is justified in any way, in anyone, whatever he may do,
T-13.X.7. The Holy Spirit does not keep illusions in your mind to frighten you, and show them to
T-13.X.8. Now it is given you to heal and teach, to make what will be now. 2 As yet it is not now. 3
T-13.X.9. You who have been unmerciful to yourself do not remember your Father's Love. 2 And
T-13.X.10. Release from guilt as you would be released. 2 There is no other way to look within and
T-13.X.11. You cannot enter into real relationships with any of God's Sons unless you love them all
T-13.X.12. No illusion that you have ever held against him has touched his innocence in any way. 2
T-13.X.13. Like you, my faith and my belief are centered on what I treasure. 2 The difference is that
T-13.X.14. Praise be to you who make the Father One with His Own Son. 2 Alone we are all lowly,
T-13.XI.1. Forgetfulness and sleep and even death become the ego's best advice for dealing with the
T-13.XI.2. God would not have His Son embattled, and so His Son's imagined "enemy" is totally
T-13.XI.3. When we are all united in Heaven, you will value nothing that you value here. 2 For
T-13.XI.4. Nothing in this world can give this peace, for nothing in this world is wholly shared. 2
T-13.XI.5. You whose mind is darkened by doubt and guilt, remember this: God gave the Holy
T-13.XI.6. You will not remember change and shift in Heaven. 2 You have need of contrast only
T-13.XI.7. Have faith in only this one thing, and it will be sufficient: God wills you be in Heaven,
T-13.XI.8. The Communication Link that God Himself placed within you, joining your mind with
T-13.XI.9. You will learn salvation because you will learn how to save. 2 It will not be possible to
T-13.XI.10. Can God's Son lose himself in dreams, when God has placed within him the glad Call to
T-13.XI.11. The Holy Spirit will undo for you everything you have learned that teaches that what is
T-14.in.1. Yes, you are blessed indeed. 2 Yet in this world you do not know it. 3 But you have the
T-14.I.1. If you are blessed and do not know it, you need to learn it must be so. 2 The knowledge is
T-14.I.2. Indirect proof of truth is needed in a world made of denial and without direction. 2 You
T-14.I.3. Seeing is always outward. 2 Were your thoughts wholly of you, the thought system you
T-14.I.4. Any direction that would lead you where the Holy Spirit leads you not, goes nowhere. 2
T-14.I.5. The Holy Spirit, therefore, must begin His teaching by showing you what you can never
T-14.II.1. The Holy Spirit needs a happy learner, in whom His mission can be happily
T-14.II.2. The Holy Spirit, seeing where you are but knowing you are elsewhere, begins His lesson
T-14.II.3. All this the Holy Spirit sees, and teaches, simply, that all this is not true. 2 To those
T-14.II.4. Like you, the Holy Spirit did not make truth. 2 Like God, He knows it to be true. 3 He
T-14.II.5. When you teach anyone that truth is true, you learn it with him. 2 And so you learn that
T-14.II.6. If you would be a happy learner, you must give everything you have learned to the Holy
T-14.II.7. The happy learner meets the conditions of learning here, as he meets the conditions of
T-14.II.8. Behold your brothers in their freedom, and learn of them how to be free of darkness. 2
T-14.III.1. The happy learner cannot feel guilty about learning. 2 This is so essential to learning that
T-14.III.2. Perhaps you are accustomed to using guiltlessness merely to offset the pain of guilt, and
T-14.III.3. There is no compromise that you can make with guilt, and escape the pain that only
T-14.III.4. Each day, each hour and minute, even each second, you are deciding between the
T-14.III.5. The miracle teaches you that you have chosen guiltlessness, freedom and joy. 2 It is not a
T-14.III.6. No penalty is ever asked of God's Son except by himself and of himself. 2 Every chance
T-14.III.7. The way to teach this simple lesson is merely this: Guiltlessness is invulnerability. 2
T-14.III.8. God is the only Cause, and guilt is not of Him. 2 Teach no one he has hurt you, for if
T-14.III.9. Whenever you choose to make decisions for yourself you are thinking destructively, and
T-14.III.10. Those who accept the Atonement are invulnerable. 2 But those who believe they are
T-14.III.11. It will never happen that you must make decisions for yourself. 2 You are not bereft of
T-14.III.12. Would you deny the truth of God's decision, and place your pitiful appraisal of yourself
T-14.III.13. The One Who knows the plan of God that God would have you follow can teach you
T-14.III.14. Let Him, therefore, be the only Guide that you would follow to salvation. 2 He knows
T-14.III.15. Seek not to appraise the worth of God's Son whom He created holy, for to do so is to
T-14.III.16. Say to the Holy Spirit only, "Decide for me," and it is done. 2 For His decisions are
T-14.III.17. How gracious it is to decide all things through Him Whose equal Love is given equally
T-14.III.18. You taught yourself the most unnatural habit of not communicating with your Creator. 2
T-14.III.19. Whenever you are in doubt what you should do, think of His Presence in you, and tell
T-14.IV.1. When you accept a brother's guiltlessness you will see the Atonement in him. 2 For by
T-14.IV.2. You who belong to the First Cause, created by Him like unto Himself and part of Him,
T-14.IV.3. When you have let all that obscured the truth in your most holy mind be undone for you,
T-14.IV.4. You need not understand creation to do what must be done before that knowledge would
T-14.IV.5. Before you make any decisions for yourself, remember that you have decided against
T-14.IV.6. When you have learned how to decide with God, all decisions become as easy and as
T-14.IV.7. Unless you are guiltless you cannot know God, Whose Will is that you know Him. 2
T-14.IV.8. Your task is not to make reality. 2 It is here without your making, but not without you. 3
T-14.IV.9. The children of Heaven live in the light of the blessing of their Father, because they
T-14.IV.10. The guiltless and the guilty are totally incapable of understanding one another. 2 Each
T-14.V.1. The only part of your mind that has reality is the part that links you still with God. 2
T-14.V.2. Everyone has a special part to play in the Atonement, but the message given to each one
T-14.V.3. Blessed Son of a wholly blessing Father, joy was created for you. 2 Who can condemn
T-14.V.4. The inheritance of the Kingdom is the right of God's Son, given him in his creation. 2 Do
T-14.V.5. We are all joined in the Atonement here, and nothing else can unite us in this world. 2 So
T-14.V.6. Teachers of innocence, each in his own way, have joined together, taking their part in the
T-14.V.7. Join your own efforts to the power that cannot fail and must result in peace. 2 No one can
T-14.V.8. Peace, then, be unto everyone who becomes a teacher of peace. 2 For peace is the
T-14.V.9. Blessed are you who teach with me. 2 Our power comes not of us, but of our Father. 3 In
T-14.V.10. The crucifixion had no part in the Atonement. 2 Only the resurrection became my part in
T-14.V.11. Each one you see you place within the holy circle of Atonement or leave outside,
T-14.VI.1. The journey that we undertake together is the exchange of dark for light, of ignorance for
T-14.VI.2. The quiet light in which the Holy Spirit dwells within you is merely perfect openness, in
T-14.VI.3. Would you continue to give imagined power to these strange ideas of safety? 2 They are
T-14.VI.4. Death yields to life simply because destruction is not true. 2 The light of guiltlessness
T-14.VI.5. You have regarded the separation as a means for breaking your communication with
T-14.VI.6. You who speak in dark and devious symbols do not understand the language you have
T-14.VI.7. You know not what you say, and so you know not what is said to you. 2 Yet your
T-14.VI.8. The Holy Spirit's function is entirely communication. 2 He therefore must remove
T-14.VII.1. What do you want? 2 Light or darkness, knowledge or ignorance are yours, but not
T-14.VII.2. The search for truth is but the honest searching out of everything that interferes with
T-14.VII.3. It is not possible to convince the unknowing that they know. 2 From their point of view
T-14.VII.4. Our emphasis has been on bringing what is undesirable to the desirable; what you do
T-14.VII.5. Light cannot enter darkness when a mind believes in darkness, and will not let it go. 2
T-14.VII.6. The Holy Spirit asks of you but this; bring to Him every secret you have locked away
T-14.VII.7. Joining with Him in seeing is the way in which you learn to share with Him the
T-14.VIII.1. In the darkness you have obscured the glory God gave you, and the power He bestowed
T-14.VIII.2. He shares it still, for you. 2 Everything that promises otherwise, great or small,
T-14.VIII.3. Let your mind wander not through darkened corridors, away from light's center. 2 You
T-14.VIII.4. There is no substitute for truth. 2 And truth will make this plain to you as you are
T-14.VIII.5. The link with which the Father joins Himself to those He gives the power to create can
T-14.IX.1. The Atonement does not make holy. 2 You were created holy. 3 It merely brings
T-14.IX.2. Bringing the ego to God is but to bring error to truth, where it stands corrected because it
T-14.IX.3. Merely by being what it is, does truth release you from everything that it is not. 2 The
T-14.IX.4. In the temple, Holiness waits quietly for the return of them that love it. 2 The Presence
T-14.IX.5. In this world you can become a spotless mirror, in which the Holiness of your Creator
T-14.IX.6. Reflections are seen in light. 2 In darkness they are obscure, and their meaning seems to
T-14.IX.7. Could you but realize for a single instant the power of healing that the reflection of God,
T-14.IX.8. The response of holiness to any form of error is always the same. 2 There is no
T-14.X.1. When no perception stands between God and His creations, or between His children and
T-14.X.2. In Heaven reality is shared and not reflected. 2 By sharing its reflection here, its truth
T-14.X.3. Miracles are not in competition, and the number of them that you can do is limitless. 2
T-14.X.4. Perhaps you have been aware of lack of competition among your thoughts, which even
T-14.X.5. The result is a weaving, changing pattern that never rests and is never still. 2 It shifts
T-14.X.6. It will seem difficult for you to learn that you have no basis at all for ordering your
T-14.X.7. The only judgment involved is the Holy Spirit's one division into two categories; one of
T-14.X.8. The ego is incapable of understanding content, and is totally unconcerned with it. 2 To
T-14.X.9. This is characteristic of the ego's judgments. 2 Separately, they seem to hold, but put
T-14.X.10. It is impossible to remember God in secret and alone. 2 For remembering Him means
T-14.X.11. As God communicates to the Holy Spirit in you, so does the Holy Spirit translate His
T-14.X.12. The miracle is the recognition that this is true. 2 Where there is love, your brother must
T-14.XI.1. Yet the essential thing is learning that you do not know. 2 Knowledge is power, and all
T-14.XI.2. Be willing, then, for all of it to be undone, and be glad that you are not bound to it
T-14.XI.3. Atonement teaches you how to escape forever from everything that you have taught
T-14.XI.4. You who have not yet brought all of the darkness you have taught yourself into the light
T-14.XI.5. You have one test, as sure as God, by which to recognize if what you learned is true. 2 If
T-14.XI.6. Do not be concerned about how you can learn a lesson so completely different from
T-14.XI.7. You cannot be your guide to miracles, for it is you who made them necessary. 2 And
T-14.XI.8. How can you, so firmly bound to guilt and committed so to remain, establish for yourself
T-14.XI.9. Do you think that what the Holy Spirit would have you give He would withhold from
T-14.XI.10. He Who has freed you from the past would teach you are free of it. 2 He would but
T-14.XI.11. God's Son will always be indivisible. 2 As we are held as one in God, so do we learn as
T-14.XI.12. Those who remember always that they know nothing, and who have become willing to
T-14.XI.13. Only those who recognize they cannot know unless the effects of understanding are
T-14.XI.14. If you want peace you must abandon the teacher of attack. 2 The Teacher of peace will
T-14.XI.15. The power of God, from which they both arise, is yours as surely as it is His. 2 You
T-15.I.1. Can you imagine what it means to have no cares, no worries, no anxieties, but merely to be
T-15.I.2. One source of perceived discouragement from which you may suffer is your belief that
T-15.I.3. The ego is an ally of time, but not a friend. 2 For it is as mistrustful of death as it is of life,
T-15.I.4. The belief in hell is inescapable to those who identify with the ego. 2 Their nightmares and
T-15.I.5. The ego teaches that Heaven is here and now because the future is hell. 2 Even when it
T-15.I.6. How bleak and despairing is the ego's use of time! 2 And how terrifying! 3 For underneath
T-15.I.7. The Holy Spirit teaches thus: There is no hell. 2 Hell is only what the ego has made of the
T-15.I.8. The Holy Spirit would undo all of this now. 2 Fear is not of the present, but only of the
T-15.I.9. This lesson takes no time. 2 For what is time without a past and future? 3 It has taken time
T-15.I.10. Time is inconceivable without change, yet holiness does not change. 2 Learn from this
T-15.I.11. If you are tempted to be dispirited by thinking how long it would take to change your
T-15.I.12. You will never give this holy instant to the Holy Spirit on behalf of your release while
T-15.I.13. How long is an instant? 2 It is as short for your brother as it is for you. 3 Practice giving
T-15.I.14. How long is an instant? 2 As long as it takes to re-establish perfect sanity, perfect peace
T-15.I.15. Time is your friend, if you leave it to the Holy Spirit to use. 2 He needs but very little to
T-15.II.1. The Atonement is in time, but not for time. 2 Being in you, it is eternal. 3 What holds
T-15.II.2. Do not be concerned with time, and fear not the instant of holiness that will remove all
T-15.II.3. How long can it take to be where God would have you? 2 For you are where you have
T-15.II.4. You do not realize how much you have misused your brothers by seeing them as sources
T-15.II.5. The holy instant has not yet happened to you. 2 Yet it will, and you will recognize it with
T-15.II.6. Start now to practice your little part in separating out the holy instant. 2 You will receive
T-15.III.1. Be not content with littleness. 2 But be sure you understand what littleness is, and why
T-15.III.2. Yet what you do not realize, each time you choose, is that your choice is your evaluation
T-15.III.3. There is a deep responsibility you owe yourself, and one you must learn to remember all
T-15.III.4. There is no doubt about what your function is, for the Holy Spirit knows what it is. 2
T-15.III.5. I asked you earlier, "Would you be hostage to the ego or host to God?" 2 Let this
T-15.III.6. The Holy Spirit can hold your magnitude, clean of all littleness, clearly and in perfect
T-15.III.7. In this season (Christmas) which celebrates the birth of holiness into this world, join with
T-15.III.8. Is it a sacrifice to leave littleness behind, and wander not in vain? 2 It is not sacrifice to
T-15.III.9. Holy child of God, when will you learn that only holiness can content you and give you
T-15.III.10. Decide with me, who has decided to abide with you. 2 I will as my Father wills,
T-15.III.11. If you are wholly willing to leave salvation to the plan of God and unwilling to attempt
T-15.III.12. Call forth in everyone only the remembrance of God, and of the Heaven that is in him.
T-15.IV.1. This course is not beyond immediate learning, unless you believe that what God wills
T-15.IV.2. Your practice must therefore rest upon your willingness to let all littleness go. 2 The
T-15.IV.3. Be humble before Him, and yet great in Him. 2 And value no plan of the ego before the
T-15.IV.4. Would you learn how perfect and immaculate is the holy altar on which your Father has
T-15.IV.5. I stand within the holy instant, as clear as you would have me. 2 And the extent to which
T-15.IV.6. The reason this course is simple is that truth is simple. 2 Complexity is of the ego, and is
T-15.IV.7. How can you do this when you would prefer to have private thoughts and keep them? 2
T-15.IV.8. Every thought you would keep hidden shuts communication off, because you would have
T-15.IV.9. The necessary condition for the holy instant does not require that you have no thoughts
T-15.V.1. The holy instant is the Holy Spirit's most useful learning device for teaching you love's
T-15.V.2. The past is the ego's chief learning device, for it is in the past that you learned to define
T-15.V.3. You cannot love parts of reality and understand what love means. 2 If you would love
T-15.V.4. Because of guilt, all special relationships have elements of fear in them. 2 This is why
T-15.V.5. The Holy Spirit knows no one is special. 2 Yet He also perceives that you have made
T-15.V.6. Any relationship you would substitute for another has not been offered to the Holy Spirit
T-15.V.7. The ego's use of relationships is so fragmented that it frequently goes even farther; one
T-15.V.8. Everyone on earth has formed special relationships, and although this is not so in Heaven,
T-15.V.9. God knows you now. 2 He remembers nothing, having always known you exactly as He
T-15.V.10. All your relationships are blessed in the holy instant, because the blessing is not limited.
T-15.V.11. Think you that you can judge the Self of God? 2 God has created It beyond judgment,
T-15.VI.1. It is impossible to use one relationship at the expense of another and not to suffer guilt. 2
T-15.VI.2. You have so little faith in yourself because you are unwilling to accept the fact that
T-15.VI.3. All separation vanishes as holiness is shared. 2 For holiness is power, and by sharing it,
T-15.VI.4. You do not find it difficult to believe that when another calls on God for love, your call
T-15.VI.5. In the world of scarcity, love has no meaning and peace is impossible. 2 For gain and
T-15.VI.6. In the holy instant nothing happens that has not always been. 2 Only the veil that has
T-15.VI.7. It is through us that peace will come. 2 Join me in the idea of peace, for in ideas minds
T-15.VI.8. In the holy instant God is remembered, and the language of communication with all your
T-15.VII.1. Beyond the poor attraction of the special love relationship, and always obscured by it, is
T-15.VII.2. The ego establishes relationships only to get something. 2 And it would keep the giver
T-15.VII.3. The sick attraction of guilt must be recognized for what it is. 2 For having been made
T-15.VII.4. We said before that the ego attempts to maintain and increase guilt, but in such a way
T-15.VII.5. It is this chain that binds the Son of God to guilt, and it is this chain the Holy Spirit
T-15.VII.6. In one way or another, every relationship the ego makes is based on the idea that by
T-15.VII.7. In such insane relationships, the attraction of what you do not want seems to be much
T-15.VII.8. Yet they only seem to be together. 2 For relationships, to the ego, mean only that bodies
T-15.VII.9. Suffering and sacrifice are the gifts with which the ego would "bless" all unions. 2 And
T-15.VII.10. Whenever you are angry, you can be sure that you have formed a special relationship
T-15.VII.11. The Holy Spirit cannot teach through fear. 2 And how can He communicate with you,
T-15.VII.12. The illusion of the autonomy of the body and its ability to overcome loneliness is but
T-15.VII.13. Forgiveness lies in communication as surely as damnation lies in guilt. 2 It is the Holy
T-15.VII.14. It is through the holy instant that what seems impossible is accomplished, making it
T-15.VIII.1. The holy instant does not replace the need for learning, for the Holy Spirit must not
T-15.VIII.2. Hear Him gladly, and learn of Him that you have need of no special relationships at all.
T-15.VIII.3. Relate only with what will never leave you, and what you can never leave. 2 The
T-15.VIII.4. Think but an instant on this: God gave the Sonship to you, to ensure your perfect
T-15.VIII.5. The Holy Spirit is God's attempt to free you of what He does not understand. 2 And
T-15.VIII.6. In the Holy Spirit alone lies the awareness of what God cannot know, and what you do
T-15.IX.1. As the ego would limit your perception of your brothers to the body, so would the Holy
T-15.IX.2. Our task is but to continue, as fast as possible, the necessary process of looking straight
T-15.IX.3. In the holy instant, where the Great Rays replace the body in awareness, the recognition
T-15.IX.4. It is impossible to divide your strength between Heaven and hell, God and the ego, and
T-15.IX.5. If you would but let the Holy Spirit tell you of the Love of God for you, and the need
T-15.IX.6. You have no conception of the limits you have placed on your perception, and no idea of
T-15.IX.7. When the body ceases to attract you, and when you place no value on it as a means of
T-15.X.1. It is in your power, in time, to delay the perfect union of the Father and the Son. 2 For in
T-15.X.2. The holy instant is truly the time of Christ. 2 For in this liberating instant no guilt is laid
T-15.X.3. We who are one cannot give separately. 2 When you are willing to accept our relationship
T-15.X.4. It is in your power to make this season holy, for it is in your power to make the time of
T-15.X.5. It is not necessary to follow fear through all the circuitous routes by which it burrows
T-15.X.6. As host to the ego, you believe that you can give all your guilt away whenever you want,
T-15.X.7. How fearful, then, has God become to you, and how great a sacrifice do you believe His
T-15.X.8. You think that everyone outside yourself demands your sacrifice, but you do not see that
T-15.X.9. You will not succeed in being partial hostage to the ego, for it keeps no bargains and
T-15.XI.1. Fear not to recognize the whole idea of sacrifice as solely of your making. 2 And seek
T-15.XI.2. The sign of Christmas is a star, a light in darkness. 2 See it not outside yourself, but
T-15.XI.3. This Christmas give the Holy Spirit everything that would hurt you. 2 Let yourself be
T-15.XI.4. You who believe that sacrifice is love must learn that sacrifice is separation from love. 2
T-15.XI.5. As long as you perceive the body as your reality, so long will you perceive yourself as
T-15.XI.6. So is it that, in all your seeking for love, you seek for sacrifice and find it. 2 Yet you find
T-15.XI.7. In the holy instant the condition of love is met, for minds are joined without the body's
T-15.XI.8. Let no despair darken the joy of Christmas, for the time of Christ is meaningless apart
T-15.XI.9. God offers thanks to the holy host who would receive Him, and lets Him enter and abide
T-15.XI.10. This is the time in which a new year will soon be born from the time of Christ. 2 I have
T-16.I.1. To empathize does not mean to join in suffering, for that is what you must refuse to
T-16.I.2. The clearest proof that empathy as the ego uses it is destructive lies in the fact that it is
T-16.I.3. Your part is only to remember this; you do not want anything you value to come of a
T-16.I.4. True empathy is of Him Who knows what it is. 2 You will learn His interpretation of it if
T-16.I.5. The triumph of weakness is not what you would offer to a brother. 2 And yet you
T-16.I.6. The meaning of love is lost in any relationship that looks to weakness, and hopes to find
T-16.I.7. You will attempt to do this only in secrecy. 2 And you will think that by meeting the needs
T-16.II.1. You may still think that holiness is impossible to understand, because you cannot see how
T-16.II.2. There is a tendency to fragment, and then to be concerned about the truth of just a little
T-16.II.3. To you the miracle cannot seem natural, because what you have done to hurt your mind
T-16.II.4. You have done miracles, but it is quite apparent that you have not done them alone. 2
T-16.II.5. How can faith in reality be yours while you are bent on making it unreal? 2 And are you
T-16.II.6. No evidence will convince you of the truth of what you do not want. 2 Yet your
T-16.II.7. This is a year of joy, in which your listening will increase and peace will grow with its
T-16.II.8. Do not interpret against God's Love, for you have many witnesses that speak of it so
T-16.II.9. You have never given any problem to the Holy Spirit He has not solved for you, nor will
T-16.III.1. We have already learned that everyone teaches, and teaches all the time. 2 You may
T-16.III.2. You may have taught freedom, but you have not learned how to be free. 2 I said earlier,
T-16.III.3. Does not the fact that you have not learned what you have taught show you that you do
T-16.III.4. This is a course in how to know yourself. 2 You have taught what you are, but have not
T-16.III.5. Your teaching has already done this, for the Holy Spirit is part of you. 2 Created by God,
T-16.III.6. You are not two selves in conflict. 2 What is beyond God? 3 If you who hold Him and
T-16.III.7. This year you will begin to learn, and make learning commensurate with teaching. 2 You
T-16.III.8. To your most holy Self all praise is due for what you are, and for what He is Who
T-16.III.9. Your bridge is builded stronger than you think, and your foot is planted firmly on it. 2
T-16.IV.1. Be not afraid to look upon the special hate relationship, for freedom lies in looking at it.
T-16.IV.2. The symbols of hate against the symbols of love play out a conflict that does not exist. 2
T-16.IV.3. The special love relationship is an attempt to limit the destructive effects of hate by
T-16.IV.4. Love is not an illusion. 2 It is a fact. 3 Where disillusionment is possible, there was not
T-16.IV.5. There are no triumphs of love. 2 Only hate is at all concerned with the "triumph of love."
T-16.IV.6. Your task is not to seek for love, but merely to seek and find all of the barriers within
T-16.IV.7. Recognize this, for it is true, and truth must be recognized if it is to be distinguished
T-16.IV.8. Heaven waits silently, and your creations are holding out their hands to help you cross
T-16.IV.9. Across the bridge is your completion, for you will be wholly in God, willing for nothing
T-16.IV.10. The bridge that leads to union in yourself must lead to knowledge, for it was built with
T-16.IV.11. Would you not go through fear to love? 2 For such the journey seems to be. 3 Love
T-16.IV.12. Your Father can no more forget the truth in you than you can fail to remember it. 2 The
T-16.IV.13. If special relationships of any kind would hinder God's completion, can they have any
T-16.V.1. In looking at the special relationship, it is necessary first to realize that it involves a great
T-16.V.2. Very simply, the attempt to make guilty is always directed against God. 2 For the ego
T-16.V.3. The special love relationship is the ego's most boasted gift, and one which has the most
T-16.V.4. It is in the special relationship, born of the hidden wish for special love from God, that
T-16.V.5. To everyone Heaven is completion. 2 There can be no disagreement on this, because both
T-16.V.6. The special relationship is a strange and unnatural ego device for joining hell and
T-16.V.7. Most curious of all is the concept of the self which the ego fosters in the special
T-16.V.8. The "better" self the ego seeks is always one that is more special. 2 And whoever seems
T-16.V.9. The appeal of hell lies only in the terrible attraction of guilt, which the ego holds out to
T-16.V.10. If you perceived the special relationship as a triumph over God, would you want it? 2
T-16.V.11. How can you grant unlimited power to what you think you have attacked? 2 So fearful
T-16.V.12. Whenever any form of special relationship tempts you to seek for love in ritual,
T-16.V.13. See in the special relationship nothing more than a meaningless attempt to raise other
T-16.V.14. Salvation lies in the simple fact that illusions are not fearful because they are not true. 2
T-16.V.15. The core of the separation illusion lies simply in the fantasy of destruction of love's
T-16.V.16. The decision whether or not to listen to this course and follow it is but the choice
T-16.V.17. This year is thus the time to make the easiest decision that ever confronted you, and also
T-16.VI.1. The search for the special relationship is the sign that you equate yourself with the ego
T-16.VI.2. Love is freedom. 2 To look for it by placing yourself in bondage is to separate yourself
T-16.VI.3. There is a way in which the Holy Spirit asks your help, if you would have His. 2 The
T-16.VI.4. The special relationship is totally meaningless without a body. 2 If you value it, you must
T-16.VI.5. You see the world you value. 2 On this side of the bridge you see the world of separate
T-16.VI.6. Across the bridge it is so different! 2 For a time the body is still seen, but not
T-16.VI.7. The bridge itself is nothing more than a transition in the perspective of reality. 2 On this
T-16.VI.8. Fear not that you will be abruptly lifted up and hurled into reality. 2 Time is kind, and if
T-16.VI.9. Nothing you seek to strengthen in the special relationship is really part of you. 2 And you
T-16.VI.10. Be glad you have escaped the mockery of salvation the ego offered you, and look not
T-16.VI.11. The new perspective you will gain from crossing over will be the understanding of
T-16.VI.12. The Holy Spirit asks only this little help of you: Whenever your thoughts wander to a
T-16.VII.1. It is impossible to let the past go without relinquishing the special relationship. 2 For the
T-16.VII.2. The special relationship takes vengeance on the past. 2 By seeking to remove suffering
T-16.VII.3. Do not underestimate the intensity of the ego's drive for vengeance on the past. 2 It is
T-16.VII.4. The past is gone; seek not to preserve it in the special relationship that binds you to it,
T-16.VII.5. In the special relationship it does not seem to be an acting out of vengeance that you
T-16.VII.6. Against the ego's insane notion of salvation the Holy Spirit gently lays the holy instant.
T-16.VII.7. For a time you may attempt to bring illusions into the holy instant, to hinder your full
T-16.VII.8. What God has given you is truly given, and will be truly received. 2 For God's gifts
T-16.VII.9. There is nothing you can hold against reality. 2 All that must be forgiven are the
T-16.VII.10. Remember that you always choose between truth and illusion; between the real
T-16.VII.11. Seek and find His message in the holy instant, where all illusions are forgiven. 2 From
T-16.VII.12. Forgive us our illusions, Father, and help us to accept our true relationship with You,
T-17.I.1. The betrayal of the Son of God lies only in illusions, and all his "sins" are but his own
T-17.I.2. It is, then, only your wish to change reality that is fearful, because by your wish you think
T-17.I.3. When you maintain that there must be an order of difficulty in miracles, all you mean is
T-17.I.4. As long as you would have it so, so long will the illusion of an order of difficulty in
T-17.I.5. Think you that you can bring truth to fantasy, and learn what truth means from the
T-17.I.6. Be willing, then, to give all you have held outside the truth to Him Who knows the truth,
T-17.II.1. Can you imagine how beautiful those you forgive will look to you? 2 In no fantasy have
T-17.II.2. This loveliness is not a fantasy. 2 It is the real world, bright and clean and new, with
T-17.II.3. This step, the smallest ever taken, is still the greatest accomplishment of all in God's plan
T-17.II.4. The stars will disappear in light, and the sun that opened up the world to beauty will
T-17.II.5. The real world is attained simply by the complete forgiveness of the old, the world you
T-17.II.6. All this beauty will rise to bless your sight as you look upon the world with forgiving
T-17.II.7. From the forgiven world the Son of God is lifted easily into his home. 2 And there he
T-17.II.8. How much do you want salvation? 2 It will give you the real world, trembling with
T-17.III.1. To forgive is merely to remember only the loving thoughts you gave in the past, and
T-17.III.2. It is these shadow figures that would make the ego holy in your sight, and teach you
T-17.III.3. In the unholy relationship, it is not the body of the other with which union is attempted,
T-17.III.4. Time is indeed unkind to the unholy relationship. 2 For time is cruel in the ego's hands,
T-17.III.5. How can the Holy Spirit bring His interpretation of the body as a means of
T-17.III.6. The ego seeks to "resolve" its problems, not at their source, but where they were not
T-17.III.7. All this you will do gladly, if you but let Him hold the spark before you, to light your
T-17.III.8. The past becomes the justification for entering into a continuing, unholy alliance with the
T-17.III.9. It is still up to you to choose to join with truth or with illusion. 2 But remember that to
T-17.III.10. My holy brother, I would enter into all your relationships, and step between you and
T-17.IV.1. God established His relationship with you to make you happy, and nothing you do that
T-17.IV.2. In this world it is impossible to create. 2 Yet it is possible to make happy. 3 I have said
T-17.IV.3. You have made very real relationships even in this world. 2 Yet you do not recognize
T-17.IV.4. In a sense, the special relationship was the ego's answer to the creation of the Holy
T-17.IV.5. The ego is always alert to threat, and the part of your mind into which the ego was
T-17.IV.6. You have but little difficulty now in realizing that the thought system the special
T-17.IV.7. It is essential to realize that all defenses do what they would defend. 2 The underlying
T-17.IV.8. The special relationship has the most imposing and deceptive frame of all the defenses
T-17.IV.9. Look at the picture. 2 Do not let the frame distract you. 3 This gift is given you for your
T-17.IV.10. That is why the holy instant is so important in the defense of truth. 2 The truth itself
T-17.IV.11. The holy instant is a miniature of Heaven, sent you from Heaven. 2 It is a picture, too,
T-17.IV.12. Two gifts are offered you. 2 Each is complete, and cannot be partially accepted. 3 Each
T-17.IV.13. You who have tried so hard, and are still trying, to fit the better picture into the wrong
T-17.IV.14. The other picture is lightly framed, for time cannot contain eternity. 2 There is no
T-17.IV.15. The picture of light, in clear-cut and unmistakable contrast, is transformed into what
T-17.IV.16. As God ascends into His rightful place and you to yours, you will experience again the
T-17.V.1. The holy relationship is the expression of the holy instant in living in this world. 2 Like
T-17.V.2. The holy relationship, a major step toward the perception of the real world, is learned. 2 It
T-17.V.3. This invitation is accepted immediately, and the Holy Spirit wastes no time in introducing
T-17.V.4. The temptation of the ego becomes extremely intense with this shift in goals. 2 For the
T-17.V.5. It would not be kinder to shift the goal more slowly, for the contrast would be obscured,
T-17.V.6. This is the time for faith. 2 You let this goal be set for you. 3 That was an act of faith. 4
T-17.V.7. Now the ego counsels thus; substitute for this another relationship to which your former
T-17.V.8. Accept with gladness what you do not understand, and let it be explained to you as you
T-17.V.9. You are very new in the ways of salvation, and think you have lost your way. 2 Your way
T-17.V.10. Throughout the Sonship is the song of freedom heard, in joyous echo of your choice. 2
T-17.V.11. You undertook, together, to invite the Holy Spirit into your relationship. 2 He could not
T-17.V.12. The experience of an instant, however compelling it may be, is easily forgotten if you
T-17.V.13. You have received the holy instant, but you may have established a condition in which
T-17.V.14. You and your brother stand together in the holy presence of truth itself. 2 Here is the
T-17.V.15. As you begin to recognize and accept the gifts you have so freely given to your brother,
T-17.VI.1. The practical application of the Holy Spirit's purpose is extremely simple, but it is
T-17.VI.2. In any situation in which you are uncertain, the first thing to consider, very simply, is
T-17.VI.3. Without a clear-cut, positive goal, set at the outset, the situation just seems to happen,
T-17.VI.4. The value of deciding in advance what you want to happen is simply that you will
T-17.VI.5. The goal of truth has further practical advantages. 2 If the situation is used for truth and
T-17.VI.6. The goal of truth requires faith. 2 Faith is implicit in the acceptance of the Holy Spirit's
T-17.VI.7. Confronted with any aspect of the situation that seems to be difficult, the ego will
T-17.VII.1. The substitutes for aspects of the situation are the witnesses to your lack of faith. 2
T-17.VII.2. There is no problem in any situation that faith will not solve. 2 There is no shift in any
T-17.VII.3. A situation is a relationship, being the joining of thoughts. 2 If problems are perceived,
T-17.VII.4. Only what you have not given can be lacking in any situation. 2 But remember this; the
T-17.VII.5. Every situation in which you find yourself is but a means to meet the purpose set for
T-17.VII.6. The goal of illusion is as closely tied to faithlessness as faith to truth. 2 If you lack faith
T-17.VII.7. The power set in you in whom the Holy Spirit's goal has been established is so far
T-17.VII.8. Yet think on this, and learn the cause of faithlessness: You think you hold against your
T-17.VII.9. Enter each situation with the faith you give your brother, or you are faithless to your
T-17.VII.10. You call for faith because of Him Who walks with you in every situation. 2 You are
T-17.VIII.1. The holy instant is nothing more than a special case, or an extreme example, of what
T-17.VIII.2. This simple courtesy is all the Holy Spirit asks of you. 2 Let truth be what it is. 3 Do
T-17.VIII.3. Would you not want to make a holy instant of every situation? 2 For such is the gift of
T-17.VIII.4. To you who have acknowledged the Call of your Redeemer, the strain of not
T-17.VIII.5. Such was the crucifixion of the Son of God. 2 His faithlessness did this to him. 3 Think
T-17.VIII.6. When you accepted truth as the goal for your relationship, you became a giver of peace
T-18.I.1. To substitute is to accept instead. 2 If you would but consider exactly what this entails,
T-18.I.2. The Holy Spirit never uses substitutes. 2 Where the ego perceives one person as a
T-18.I.3. The one emotion in which substitution is impossible is love. 2 Fear involves substitution
T-18.I.4. You who believe that God is fear made but one substitution. 2 It has taken many forms,
T-18.I.5. You may be surprised to hear how very different is reality from what you see. 2 You do
T-18.I.6. That was the first projection of error outward. 2 The world arose to hide it, and became the
T-18.I.7. When you seem to see some twisted form of the original error rising to frighten you, say
T-18.I.8. Let them all go, dancing in the wind, dipping and turning till they disappear from sight,
T-18.I.9. In your relationship with your brother, where He has taken charge of everything at your
T-18.I.10. In you there is no separation, and no substitute can keep you from your brother. 2 Your
T-18.I.11. Heaven is restored to all the Sonship through your relationship, for in it lies the Sonship,
T-18.I.12. Whom God has called should hear no substitutes. 2 Their call is but an echo of the
T-18.I.13. You have been called, together with your brother, to the most holy function this world
T-18.II.1. Does not a world that seems quite real arise in dreams? 2 Yet think what this world is. 3
T-18.II.2. Dreams are chaotic because they are governed by your conflicting wishes, and therefore
T-18.II.3. You do not find the differences between what you see in sleep and on awaking disturbing.
T-18.II.4. Dreams are perceptual temper tantrums, in which you literally scream, "I want it thus!" 2
T-18.II.5. Dreams show you that you have the power to make a world as you would have it be, and
T-18.II.6. The Holy Spirit, ever practical in His wisdom, accepts your dreams and uses them as
T-18.II.7. Your special relationship will be a means for undoing guilt in everyone blessed through
T-18.II.8. Let not the dream take hold to close your eyes. 2 It is not strange that dreams can make a
T-18.II.9. Yet Heaven is sure. 2 This is no dream. 3 Its coming means that you have chosen truth,
T-18.III.1. You who have spent your life in bringing truth to illusion, reality to fantasy, have
T-18.III.2. As the light comes nearer you will rush to darkness, shrinking from the truth, sometimes
T-18.III.3. Truth has rushed to meet you since you called upon it. 2 If you knew Who walks beside
T-18.III.4. You who hold your brother's hand also hold mine, for when you joined each other you
T-18.III.5. Each instant that we spend together will teach you that this goal is possible, and will
T-18.III.6. In your relationship you have joined with me in bringing Heaven to the Son of God, who
T-18.III.7. You who are now the bringer of salvation have the function of bringing light to darkness.
T-18.III.8. Not one light in Heaven but goes with you. 2 Not one Ray that shines forever in the
T-18.IV.1. The holy instant is the result of your determination to be holy. 2 It is the answer. 3 The
T-18.IV.2. Trust not your good intentions. 2 They are not enough. 3 But trust implicitly your
T-18.IV.3. Humility will never ask that you remain content with littleness. 2 But it does require that
T-18.IV.4. The holy instant does not come from your little willingness alone. 2 It is always the
T-18.IV.5. You merely ask the question. 2 The answer is given. 3 Seek not to answer, but merely to
T-18.IV.6. And that is all. 2 Add more, and you will merely take away the little that is asked. 3
T-18.IV.7. It is this that makes the holy instant so easy and so natural. 2 You make it difficult,
T-18.IV.8. Forget not that it has been your decision to make everything that is natural and easy for
T-18.V.1. Prepare you now for the undoing of what never was. 2 If you already understood the
T-18.V.2. Never approach the holy instant after you have tried to remove all fear and hatred from
T-18.V.3. Through your holy relationship, reborn and blessed in every holy instant you do not
T-18.V.4. Happy dreams come true, not because they are dreams, but only because they are happy.
T-18.V.5. It is no dream to love your brother as yourself. 2 Nor is your holy relationship a dream. 3
T-18.V.6. When you feel the holiness of your relationship is threatened by anything, stop instantly
T-18.V.7. Whoever is saner at the time the threat is perceived should remember how deep is his
T-18.VI.1. There is nothing outside you. 2 That is what you must ultimately learn, for it is the
T-18.VI.2. What could God give but knowledge of Himself? 2 What else is there to give? 3 The
T-18.VI.3. Minds are joined; bodies are not. 2 Only by assigning to the mind the properties of the
T-18.VI.4. In this, the mind is clearly delusional. 2 It cannot attack, but it maintains it can, and uses
T-18.VI.5. Would you not have the instruments of separation reinterpreted as means for salvation,
T-18.VI.6. It is insane to use the body as the scapegoat for guilt, directing its attack and blaming it
T-18.VI.7. This is the host of God that you have made. 2 And neither God nor His most holy Son
T-18.VI.8. Yet only thus can you escape. 2 The home of vengeance is not yours; the place you set
T-18.VI.9. The body is outside you, and but seems to surround you, shutting you off from others
T-18.VI.10. You can stretch out your hand and reach to Heaven. 2 You whose hand is joined with
T-18.VI.11. Everyone has experienced what he would call a sense of being transported beyond
T-18.VI.12. This can occur regardless of the physical distance that seems to be between you and
T-18.VI.13. There is no violence at all in this escape. 2 The body is not attacked, but simply
T-18.VI.14. It is possible because you want it. 2 The sudden expansion of awareness that takes place
T-18.VII.1. You still have too much faith in the body as a source of strength. 2 What plans do you
T-18.VII.2. There is one thing that you have never done; you have not utterly forgotten the body. 2
T-18.VII.3. At no single instant does the body exist at all. 2 It is always remembered or anticipated,
T-18.VII.4. It is impossible to accept the holy instant without reservation unless, just for an instant,
T-18.VII.5. Your way will be different, not in purpose but in means. 2 A holy relationship is a
T-18.VII.6. Here is the ultimate release which everyone will one day find in his own way, at his
T-18.VII.7. To do anything involves the body. 2 And if you recognize you need do nothing, you
T-18.VII.8. Yet there will always be this place of rest to which you can return. 2 And you will be
T-18.VIII.1. It is only the awareness of the body that makes love seem limited. 2 For the body is a
T-18.VIII.2. The body cannot know. 2 And while you limit your awareness to its tiny senses, you
T-18.VIII.3. Within this kingdom the ego rules, and cruelly. 2 And to defend this little speck of dust
T-18.VIII.4. Yet neither sun nor ocean is even aware of all this strange and meaningless activity. 2
T-18.VIII.5. Such is the strange position in which those in a world inhabited by bodies seem to be. 2
T-18.VIII.6. Like to the sun and ocean your Self continues, unmindful that this tiny part regards
T-18.VIII.7. Do not accept this little, fenced-off aspect as yourself. 2 The sun and ocean are as
T-18.VIII.8. Love knows no bodies, and reaches to everything created like itself. 2 Its total lack of
T-18.VIII.9. The Thought of God surrounds your little kingdom, waiting at the barrier you built to
T-18.VIII.10. Go out and find them, for they bring your Self with them. 2 And lead them gently to
T-18.VIII.11. The holy instant is your invitation to love to enter into your bleak and joyless
T-18.VIII.12. Be sure of this; love has entered your special relationship, and entered fully at your
T-18.VIII.13. You have reached the end of an ancient journey, not realizing yet that it is over. 2
T-18.IX.1. You have been told to bring the darkness to the light, and guilt to holiness. 2 And you
T-18.IX.2. Be you not separate, for the One Who does surround it has brought union to you,
T-18.IX.3. From the world of bodies, made by insanity, insane messages seem to be returned to the
T-18.IX.4. The circle of fear lies just below the level the body sees, and seems to be the whole
T-18.IX.5. The body will remain guilt's messenger, and will act as it directs as long as you believe
T-18.IX.6. This heavy-seeming barrier, this artificial floor that looks like rock, is like a bank of low
T-18.IX.7. Yet in this cloud bank it is easy to see a whole world rising. 2 A solid mountain range, a
T-18.IX.8. So should it be with the dark clouds of guilt, no more impenetrable and no more
T-18.IX.9. This world of light, this circle of brightness is the real world, where guilt meets with
T-18.IX.10. Yet even forgiveness is not the end. 2 Forgiveness does make lovely, but it does not
T-18.IX.11. This course will lead to knowledge, but knowledge itself is still beyond the scope of
T-18.IX.12. Love is not learned. 2 Its meaning lies within itself. 3 And learning ends when you have
T-18.IX.13. Your relationship with your brother has been uprooted from the world of shadows, and
T-18.IX.14. And when the memory of God has come to you in the holy place of forgiveness you
T-19.I.1. We said before that when a situation has been dedicated wholly to truth, peace is
T-19.I.2. Every situation, properly perceived, becomes an opportunity to heal the Son of God. 2
T-19.I.3. The body cannot heal, because it cannot make itself sick. 2 It needs no healing. 3 Its health
T-19.I.4. Do not overlook our earlier statement that faithlessness leads straight to illusions. 2 For
T-19.I.5. It cannot be difficult to realize that faith must be the opposite of faithlessness. 2 Yet the
T-19.I.6. The inevitable compromise is the belief that the body must be healed, and not the mind. 2
T-19.I.7. Truth and illusion have no connection. 2 This will remain forever true, however much you
T-19.I.8. If you but understood how much this strange concealment has hurt your mind, and how
T-19.I.9. To have faith is to heal. 2 It is the sign that you have accepted the Atonement for yourself,
T-19.I.10. Faith is the opposite of fear, as much a part of love as fear is of attack. 2 Faith is the
T-19.I.11. Faith is the gift of God, through Him Whom God has given you. 2 Faithlessness looks
T-19.I.12. Faith is as easily exchanged for knowledge as is the real world. 2 For faith arises from
T-19.I.13. Grace is not given to a body, but to a mind. 2 And the mind that receives it looks
T-19.I.14. In the holy instant, you and your brother stand before the altar God has raised unto
T-19.I.15. As faithlessness will keep your little kingdoms barren and separate, so will faith help the
T-19.I.16. Let, then, your dedication be to the eternal, and learn how not to interfere with it and
T-19.II.1. It is essential that error be not confused with sin, and it is this distinction that makes
T-19.II.2. Sin is not an error, for sin entails an arrogance which the idea of error lacks. 2 To sin
T-19.II.3. The Son of God can be mistaken; he can deceive himself; he can even turn the power of
T-19.II.4. A major tenet in the ego's insane religion is that sin is not error but truth, and it is
T-19.II.5. Any attempt to reinterpret sin as error is always indefensible to the ego. 2 The idea of sin
T-19.II.6. It can indeed be said the ego made its world on sin. 2 Only in such a world could
T-19.II.7. There is no stone in all the ego's embattled citadel that is more heavily defended than the
T-19.II.8. Would you not rather that all this be nothing more than a mistake, entirely correctable,
T-19.III.1. The attraction of guilt is found in sin, not error. 2 Sin will be repeated because of this
T-19.III.2. The ego does not think it possible that love, not fear, is really called upon by sin, and
T-19.III.3. An error, on the other hand, is not attractive. 2 What you see clearly as a mistake you
T-19.III.4. The Holy Spirit cannot punish sin. 2 Mistakes He recognizes, and would correct them all
T-19.III.5. In time, the Holy Spirit clearly sees the Son of God can make mistakes. 2 On this you
T-19.III.6. When you are tempted to believe that sin is real, remember this: If sin is real, both God
T-19.III.7. While you believe that your reality or your brother's is bounded by a body, you will
T-19.III.8. If sin is real, it must forever be beyond the hope of healing. 2 For there would be a
T-19.III.9. And yet you look with Heaven's smile upon your lips, and Heaven's blessing on your
T-19.III.10. In the holy instant, you will see the smile of Heaven shining on both you and your
T-19.III.11. Look upon your Redeemer, and behold what He would show you in your brother, and
T-19.IV.1. As peace extends from deep inside yourself to embrace all the Sonship and give it rest, it
T-19.IV.2. All this will you do. 2 Yet the peace that already lies deeply within must first expand,
T-19.IV.3. The gratitude you owe to Him He asks but that you receive for Him. 2 And when you
T-19.IV.A.1. The First Obstacle: The Desire to Get Rid of It The first obstacle that peace must flow
T-19.IV.A.2. Why would you want peace homeless? 2 What do you think that it must dispossess to
T-19.IV.A.3. The Holy Spirit's purpose rests in peace within you. 2 Yet you are still unwilling to let
T-19.IV.A.4. Would you thrust salvation away from the giver of salvation? 2 For such have you
T-19.IV.A.5. To overcome the world is no more difficult than to surmount your little wall. 2 For in
T-19.IV.A.6. There is a hush in Heaven, a happy expectancy, a little pause of gladness in
T-19.IV.A.7. The little insane wish to get rid of Him Whom you invited in and push Him out must
T-19.IV.A.8. This feather of a wish, this tiny illusion, this microscopic remnant of the belief in sin,
T-19.IV.A.9. How mighty can a little feather be before the great wings of truth? 2 Can it oppose an
T-19.IV.A.10. i. The Attraction of Guilt The attraction of guilt produces fear of love, for love would
T-19.IV.A.11. Love's messengers are gently sent, and return with messages of love and gentleness.
T-19.IV.A.12. Relationships in this world are the result of how the world is seen. 2 And this
T-19.IV.A.13. Send not these savage messengers into the world, to feast upon it and to prey upon
T-19.IV.A.14. The Holy Spirit has given you love's messengers to send instead of those you trained
T-19.IV.A.15. If you send forth only the messengers the Holy Spirit gives you, wanting no messages
T-19.IV.A.16. Love, too, would set a feast before you, on a table covered with a spotless cloth, set
T-19.IV.A.17. I am made welcome in the state of grace, which means you have at last forgiven me.
T-19.IV.B.1. The Second Obstacle: The Belief the Body is Valuable for What It Offers We said that
T-19.IV.B.2. This is the value that you think peace would rob you of. 2 This is what you believe that
T-19.IV.B.3. The Holy Spirit's messengers are sent far beyond the body, calling the mind to join in
T-19.IV.B.4. Peace is extended from you only to the eternal, and it reaches out from the eternal in
T-19.IV.B.5. You have paid very dearly for your illusions, and nothing you have paid for brought
T-19.IV.B.6. Let me be to you the symbol of the end of guilt, and look upon your brother as you
T-19.IV.B.7. From your holy relationship truth proclaims the truth, and love looks on itself. 2
T-19.IV.B.8. Forgive me your illusions, and release me from punishment for what I have not done.
T-19.IV.B.9. i. The Attraction of Pain Your little part is but to give the Holy Spirit the whole idea of
T-19.IV.B.10. Faith in the eternal is always justified, for the eternal is forever kind, infinite in its
T-19.IV.B.11. But think you which it is that is compatible with you. 2 Here is your choice, and it is
T-19.IV.B.12. It is impossible to seek for pleasure through the body and not find pain. 2 It is
T-19.IV.B.13. Is not this inevitable? 2 Under fear's orders the body will pursue guilt, serving its
T-19.IV.B.14. Why should the body be anything to you? 2 Certainly what it is made of is not
T-19.IV.B.15. The ego's messages are always sent away from you, in the belief that for your
T-19.IV.B.16. Hear not its madness, and believe not the impossible is true. 2 Forget not that the ego
T-19.IV.B.17. It is not given to the ego's disciples to realize that they have dedicated themselves to
T-19.IV.C.1. C. The Third Obstacle: The Attraction of Death To you and your brother, in whose
T-19.IV.C.2. And yet a shadow cannot kill. 2 What is a shadow to the living? 3 They but walk past
T-19.IV.C.3. i. The Incorruptible Body From the ego came sin and guilt and death, in opposition to
T-19.IV.C.4. And what is the black-draped body they would bury? 2 A body which they dedicated
T-19.IV.C.5. You have another dedication that would keep the body incorruptible and perfect as
T-19.IV.C.6. You who are dedicated to the incorruptible have been given through your acceptance,
T-19.IV.C.7. Those who fear death see not how often and how loudly they call to it, and bid it come
T-19.IV.C.8. Under the dusty edge of its distorted world the ego would lay the Son of God, slain by
T-19.IV.C.9. The fear of death will go as its appeal is yielded to love's real attraction. 2 The end of
T-19.IV.C.10. What danger can assail the wholly innocent? 2 What can attack the guiltless? 3 What
T-19.IV.C.11. When anything seems to you to be a source of fear, when any situation strikes you
T-19.IV.D.1. D. The Fourth Obstacle: The Fear of God What would you see without the fear of
T-19.IV.D.2. The fourth obstacle to be surmounted hangs like a heavy veil before the face of Christ.
T-19.IV.D.3. This is the darkest veil, upheld by the belief in death and protected by its attraction. 2
T-19.IV.D.4. See how the belief in death would seem to "save" you. 2 For if this were gone, what
T-19.IV.D.5. Every obstacle that peace must flow across is surmounted in just the same way; the
T-19.IV.D.6. And now you stand in terror before what you swore never to look upon. 2 Your eyes
T-19.IV.D.7. It seems to you the world will utterly abandon you if you but raise your eyes. 2 Yet all
T-19.IV.D.8. i. The Lifting of the Veil Forget not that you came this far together, you and your
T-19.IV.D.9. No one can look upon the fear of God unterrified, unless he has accepted the
T-19.IV.D.10. Nor is it possible to look on this too soon. 2 This is the place to which everyone must
T-19.IV.D.11. To look upon the fear of God does need some preparation. 2 Only the sane can look
T-19.IV.D.12. This brother who stands beside you still seems to be a stranger. 2 You do not know
T-19.IV.D.13. Beside you is one who offers you the chalice of Atonement, for the Holy Spirit is in
T-19.IV.D.14. Behold your Friend, the Christ Who stands beside you. 2 How holy and how
T-19.IV.D.15. This is your brother, crucified by sin and waiting for release from pain. 2 Would you
T-19.IV.D.16. Here is the holy place of resurrection, to which we come again; to which we will
T-19.IV.D.17. Give faith to your brother, for faith and hope and mercy are yours to give. 2 Into the
T-19.IV.D.18. Free your brother here, as I freed you. 2 Give him the selfsame gift, nor look upon
T-19.IV.D.19. Together we will disappear into the Presence beyond the veil, not to be lost but
T-19.IV.D.20. Think carefully how you would look upon the giver of this gift, for as you look on
T-19.IV.D.21. You came this far because the journey was your choice. 2 And no one undertakes to
T-20.I.1. This is Palm Sunday, the celebration of victory and the acceptance of the truth. 2 Let us
T-20.I.2. This week begins with palms and ends with lilies, the white and holy sign the Son of God
T-20.I.3. A week is short, and yet this holy week is the symbol of the whole journey the Son of God
T-20.I.4. Easter is not the celebration of the cost of sin, but of its end. 2 If you see glimpses of the
T-20.II.1. Look upon all the trinkets made to hang upon the body, or to cover it or for its use. 2 See
T-20.II.2. Gifts are not made through bodies, if they be truly given and received. 2 For bodies can
T-20.II.3. Each gift is an evaluation of the receiver and the giver. 2 No one but sees his chosen
T-20.II.4. I have great need for lilies, for the Son of God has not forgiven me. 2 And can I offer him
T-20.II.5. You look still with the body's eyes, and they can see but thorns. 2 Yet you have asked for
T-20.II.6. This Easter, look with different eyes upon your brother. 2 You have forgiven me. 3 And
T-20.II.7. You have the vision now to look past all illusions. 2 It has been given you to see no
T-20.II.8. Your chosen home is on the other side, beyond the veil. 2 It has been carefully prepared
T-20.II.9. Would you not have your holy brother lead you there? 2 His innocence will light your
T-20.II.10. This is the way to Heaven and to the peace of Easter, in which we join in glad awareness
T-20.II.11. Here is your savior and your friend, released from crucifixion through your vision, and
T-20.III.1. The belief in sin is an adjustment. 2 And an adjustment is a change; a shift in perception,
T-20.III.2. Adjustments of any kind are of the ego. 2 For it is the ego's fixed belief that all
T-20.III.3. The holy do not interfere with truth. 2 They are not afraid of it, for it is within the truth
T-20.III.4. A simple question yet remains, and needs an answer. 2 Do you like what you have
T-20.III.5. Have you not wondered what the world is really like; how it would look through happy
T-20.III.6. Who in a holy relationship can long remain unholy? 2 The world the holy see is one
T-20.III.7. Seek not to make the Son of God adjust to his insanity. 2 There is a stranger in him, who
T-20.III.8. Does one ask judgment of what is totally bereft of judgment? 2 And if you have, would
T-20.III.9. Prisoners bound with heavy chains for years, starved and emaciated, weak and exhausted,
T-20.III.10. Such is my will for you and your brother, and for each of you for one another and for
T-20.III.11. Your gift unto your brother has given me the certainty our union will be soon. 2 Share,
T-20.IV.1. Nothing can hurt you unless you give it the power to do so. 2 Yet you give power as the
T-20.IV.2. Sin has no place in Heaven, where its results are alien and can no more enter than can
T-20.IV.3. Your insane laws were made to guarantee that you would make mistakes, and give them
T-20.IV.4. Those who choose freedom will experience only its results. 2 Their power is of God, and
T-20.IV.5. The sinless give as they received. 2 See, then, the power of sinlessness within your
T-20.IV.6. The plan is not of you, nor need you be concerned with anything except the part that has
T-20.IV.7. This is the purpose given you. 2 Think not that your forgiveness of your brother serves
T-20.IV.8. You may wonder how you can be at peace when, while you are in time, there is so much
T-20.V.1. In this world, God's Son comes closest to himself in a holy relationship. 2 There he
T-20.V.2. Each herald of eternity sings of the end of sin and fear. 2 Each speaks in time of what is
T-20.V.3. It is impossible to overestimate your brother's value. 2 Only the ego does this, but all it
T-20.V.4. How can you estimate the worth of him who offers peace to you? 2 What would you
T-20.V.5. Your brother's body is as little use to you as it is to him. 2 When it is used only as the
T-20.V.6. You look upon each holy instant as a different point in time. 2 It never changes. 3 All that
T-20.V.7. Can you evaluate the giver of a gift like this? 2 Would you exchange this gift for any
T-20.V.8. Be comforted, and feel the Holy Spirit watching over you in love and perfect confidence
T-20.VI.1. The meaning of the Son of God lies solely in his relationship with his Creator. 2 If it
T-20.VI.2. Nothing can show the contrast better than the experience of both a holy and an unholy
T-20.VI.3. But idols do not share. 2 Idols accept, but never make return. 3 They can be loved, but
T-20.VI.4. Love has no darkened temples where mysteries are kept obscure and hidden from the
T-20.VI.5. The Holy Spirit's temple is not a body, but a relationship. 2 The body is an isolated speck
T-20.VI.6. You cannot make the body the Holy Spirit's temple, and it will never be the seat of love.
T-20.VI.7. Idolaters will always be afraid of love, for nothing so severely threatens them as love's
T-20.VI.8. There is no order in relationships. 2 They either are or not. 3 An unholy relationship is no
T-20.VI.9. Idols must disappear, and leave no trace behind their going. 2 The unholy instant of their
T-20.VI.10. The holy relationship reflects the true relationship the Son of God has with his Father in
T-20.VI.11. The body is the ego's idol; the belief in sin made flesh and then projected outward. 2
T-20.VI.12. You who are learning this may still be fearful, but you are not immobilized. 2 The holy
T-20.VII.1. We have said much about discrepancies of means and end, and how these must be
T-20.VII.2. The period of discomfort that follows the sudden change in a relationship from sin to
T-20.VII.3. To obtain the goal the Holy Spirit indeed asks little. 2 He asks no more to give the
T-20.VII.4. It is impossible to see your brother as sinless and yet to look upon him as a body. 2 Is
T-20.VII.5. The body is the means by which the ego tries to make the unholy relationship seem real.
T-20.VII.6. Who sees a brother's body has laid a judgment on him, and sees him not. 2 He does not
T-20.VII.7. There is indeed a difference between this vain imagining and vision. 2 The difference
T-20.VII.8. The body cannot be looked upon except through judgment. 2 To see the body is the sign
T-20.VII.9. Your question should not be, "How can I see my brother without the body?" 2 Ask
T-20.VIII.1. Vision will come to you at first in glimpses, but they will be enough to show you what
T-20.VIII.2. Do you not want to know your own Identity? 2 Would you not happily exchange your
T-20.VIII.3. Your brother's sinlessness is given you in shining light, to look on with the Holy
T-20.VIII.4. The Holy Spirit guarantees that what God willed and gave you shall be yours. 2 This is
T-20.VIII.5. The body is the sign of weakness, vulnerability and loss of power. 2 Can such a savior
T-20.VIII.6. Everything looked upon with vision falls gently into place, according to the laws
T-20.VIII.7. Judgment is but a toy, a whim, the senseless means to play the idle game of death in
T-20.VIII.8. Hallucinations disappear when they are recognized for what they are. 2 This is the
T-20.VIII.9. Only two purposes are possible. 2 And one is sin, the other holiness. 3 Nothing is in
T-20.VIII.10. What has no meaning cannot be perceived. 2 And meaning always looks within to
T-20.VIII.11. When you have looked on what seemed terrifying, and seen it change to sights of
T-21.in.1. Projection makes perception. 2 The world you see is what you gave it, nothing more than
T-21.in.2. Damnation is your judgment on yourself, and this you will project upon the world. 2 See
T-21.I.1. Never forget the world the sightless "see" must be imagined, for what it really looks like is
T-21.I.2. How foolish is it to attempt to judge what could be seen instead. 2 It is not necessary to
T-21.I.3. There is no need to learn through pain. 2 And gentle lessons are acquired joyously, and are
T-21.I.4. The blind become accustomed to their world by their adjustments to it. 2 They think they
T-21.I.5. Thus they define their life and where they live, adjusting to it as they think they must,
T-21.I.6. Listen,--perhaps you catch a hint of an ancient state not quite forgotten; dim, perhaps, and
T-21.I.7. The notes are nothing. 2 Yet you have kept them with you, not for themselves, but as a
T-21.I.8. Beyond the body, beyond the sun and stars, past everything you see and yet somehow
T-21.I.9. This is the vision of the Son of God, whom you know well. 2 Here is the sight of him who
T-21.I.10. And now the blind can see, for that same song they sing in honor of their Creator gives
T-21.II.1. We have repeated how little is asked of you to learn this course. 2 It is the same small
T-21.II.2. This is the only thing that you need do for vision, happiness, release from pain and the
T-21.II.3. It is impossible the Son of God be merely driven by events outside of him. 2 It is
T-21.II.4. Begrudge not then this little offering. 2 Withhold it, and you keep the world as now you
T-21.II.5. The world you see is but the idle witness that you were right. 2 This witness is insane. 3
T-21.II.6. Perhaps you do not see the need for you to give this little offering. 2 Look closer, then, at
T-21.II.7. The Holy Spirit can give you faith in holiness and vision to see it easily enough. 2 But
T-21.II.8. Be willing, for an instant, to leave your altars free of what you placed upon them, and
T-21.II.9. We have already said that wishful thinking is how the ego deals with what it wants, to
T-21.II.10. When vision is denied, confusion of cause and effect becomes inevitable. 2 The purpose
T-21.II.11. It is as needful that you recognize you made the world you see, as that you recognize that
T-21.II.12. The Son's creations are like his Father's. 2 Yet in creating them the Son does not delude
T-21.II.13. Yet the truth is you and your brother were both created by a loving Father, Who created
T-21.III.1. All special relationships have sin as their goal. 2 For they are bargains with reality,
T-21.III.2. If you accept this change, you have accepted the idea of making room for truth. 2 The
T-21.III.3. Why is it strange to you that faith can move mountains? 2 This is indeed a little feat for
T-21.III.4. Faith and belief and vision are the means by which the goal of holiness is reached. 2
T-21.III.5. It is impossible that the Son of God lack faith, but he can choose where he would have it
T-21.III.6. The Holy Spirit has a use for all the means for sin by which you sought to find it. 2 But
T-21.III.7. Faith and belief become attached to vision, as all the means that once served sin are
T-21.III.8. Those who would free their brothers from the body can have no fear. 2 They have
T-21.III.9. Those who believe in sin must think the Holy Spirit asks for sacrifice, for this is how
T-21.III.10. Your faith in sacrifice has given it great power in your sight; except you do not realize
T-21.III.11. Think you the Holy Spirit is concerned with this? 2 He gives not what it is His purpose
T-21.III.12. The body was made to be a sacrifice to sin, and in the darkness so it still is seen. 2 Yet
T-21.IV.1. The Holy Spirit will never teach you that you are sinful. 2 Errors He will correct, but this
T-21.IV.2. Remember that the ego is not alone. 2 Its rule is tempered, and its unknown "enemy,"
T-21.IV.3. What if you looked within and saw no sin? 2 This "fearful" question is one the ego never
T-21.IV.4. Your liberation still is only partial; still limited and incomplete, yet born within you. 2
T-21.IV.5. This part has seen your brother, and recognized him perfectly since time began. 2 And it
T-21.IV.6. There is no inconsistency in what the Holy Spirit teaches. 2 This is the reasoning of the
T-21.IV.7. And now the ego is afraid. 2 Yet what it hears in terror, the other part hears as the
T-21.IV.8. Look gently on your brother, and remember the ego's weakness is revealed in both your
T-21.V.1. Perception selects, and makes the world you see. 2 It literally picks it out as the mind
T-21.V.2. Reality needs no cooperation from you to be itself. 2 But your awareness of it needs your
T-21.V.3. There is another vision and another Voice in which your freedom lies, awaiting but your
T-21.V.4. You do not realize the whole extent to which the idea of separation has interfered with
T-21.V.5. God's plan for your salvation could not have been established without your will and your
T-21.V.6. God's plan is simple; never circular and never self-defeating. 2 He has no Thoughts
T-21.V.7. Where would the answer be but in the Source? 2 And where are you but there, where this
T-21.V.8. Faith and perception and belief can be misplaced, and serve the great deceiver's needs as
T-21.V.9. The part of mind where reason lies was dedicated, by your will in union with your
T-21.V.10. You have come very close to this. 2 Faith and belief have shifted, and you have asked
T-21.VI.1. Reason cannot see sin but can see errors, and leads to their correction. 2 It does not value
T-21.VI.2. Correction cannot be accepted or refused by you without your brother. 2 Sin would
T-21.VI.3. No one can think but for himself, as God thinks not without His Son. 2 Only were Both
T-21.VI.4. Madness is an attack on reason that drives it out of mind, and takes its place. 2 Reason
T-21.VI.5. The body does not separate you from your brother, and if you think it does you are
T-21.VI.6. If you choose sin instead of healing, you would condemn the Son of God to what can
T-21.VI.7. Neither your brother nor yourself can be attacked alone. 2 But neither can accept a
T-21.VI.8. That you and your brother are joined is your salvation; the gift of Heaven, not the gift of
T-21.VI.9. You are your brother's savior. 2 He is yours. 3 Reason speaks happily indeed of this. 4
T-21.VI.10. The Son of God is always blessed as one. 2 And as his gratitude goes out to you who
T-21.VI.11. The power you have over the Son of God is not a threat to his reality. 2 It but attests to
T-21.VII.1. Do you not see that all your misery comes from the strange belief that you are
T-21.VII.2. No one believes the Son of God is powerless. 2 And those who see themselves as
T-21.VII.3. Frantic and loud and strong the dark ones seem to be. 2 Yet they know not their
T-21.VII.4. The army of the powerless is weak indeed. 2 It has no weapons and it has no enemy. 3
T-21.VII.5. Yet hate must have a target. 2 There can be no faith in sin without an enemy. 3 Who
T-21.VII.6. You may already have answered the first three questions, but not yet the last. 2 For this
T-21.VII.7. Forget not that the choice of sin or truth, helplessness or power, is the choice of whether
T-21.VII.8. Consider carefully your answer to the last question you have left unanswered still. 2
T-21.VII.9. This is your one decision; this the condition for what occurs. 2 It is irrelevant to how it
T-21.VII.10. Why is the final question so important? 2 Reason will tell you why. 3 It is the same as
T-21.VII.11. In content all the questions are the same. 2 For each one asks if you are willing to
T-21.VII.12. Why do you think you are unsure the others have been answered? 2 Could it be
T-21.VII.13. Elusive happiness, or happiness in changing form that shifts with time and place, is an
T-21.VIII.1. Are thoughts, then, dangerous? 2 To bodies, yes! 3 The thoughts that seem to kill are
T-21.VIII.2. The constancy of joy is a condition quite alien to your understanding. 2 Yet if you
T-21.VIII.3. Reason will tell you that you cannot ask for happiness inconstantly. 2 For if what you
T-21.VIII.4. You who complete God's Will and are His happiness, whose will is powerful as His, a
T-21.VIII.5. What is the holy instant but God's appeal to you to recognize what He has given you? 2
T-22.in.1. Take pity on yourself, so long enslaved. 2 Rejoice whom God hath joined have come
T-22.in.2. Who has need for sin? 2 Only the lonely and alone, who see their brothers different from
T-22.in.3. A holy relationship starts from a different premise. 2 Each one has looked within and
T-22.in.4. Think what a holy relationship can teach! 2 Here is belief in differences undone. 3 Here
T-22.I.1. Let reason take another step. 2 If you attack whom God would heal and hate the one He
T-22.I.2. Yet we have heard a very similar description earlier, but it was not of you. 2 But still this
T-22.I.3. You have not realized it is impossible to understand what fails entirely to reach you. 2 You
T-22.I.4. What could be secret from God's Will? 2 Yet you believe that you have secrets. 3 What
T-22.I.5. Your sight was given you, along with everything that you can understand. 2 You will
T-22.I.6. Of all the messages you have received and failed to understand, this course alone is open
T-22.I.7. So in each holy relationship is the ability to communicate instead of separate reborn. 2 Yet
T-22.I.8. Think what is given you, my holy brother. 2 This child will teach you what you do not
T-22.I.9. Be certain God did not entrust His Son to the unworthy. 2 Nothing but what is part of Him
T-22.I.10. Here is the first direct perception that you can make. 2 You make it through awareness
T-22.I.11. Christ comes to what is like Himself; the same, not different. 2 For He is always drawn
T-22.II.1. The opposite of illusions is not disillusionment but truth. 2 Only to the ego, to which truth
T-22.II.2. Truth is the opposite of illusions because it offers joy. 2 What else but joy could be the
T-22.II.3. Illusions carry only guilt and suffering, sickness and death, to their believers. 2 The form
T-22.II.4. Reason will tell you that the only way to escape from misery is to recognize it and go the
T-22.II.5. Both reason and the ego will tell you this, but what they make of it is not the same. 2 The
T-22.II.6. This is a crucial period in this course, for here the separation of you and the ego must be
T-22.II.7. Forsake not now your brother. 2 For you who are the same will not decide alone nor
T-22.II.8. There is no part of Heaven you can take and weave into illusions. 2 Nor is there one
T-22.II.9. Let us look closer at the whole illusion that what you made has power to enslave its
T-22.II.10. Behold the great projection, but look on it with the decision that it must be healed, and
T-22.II.11. Only your thoughts have been impossible. 2 Salvation cannot be. 3 It is impossible to
T-22.II.12. Beyond the body that you interposed between you and your brother, and shining in the
T-22.II.13. All you need do to dwell in quiet here with Christ is share His vision. 2 Quickly and
T-22.III.1. The introduction of reason into the ego's thought system is the beginning of its undoing,
T-22.III.2. The ego's whole continuance depends on its belief you cannot learn this course. 2 Share
T-22.III.3. Reason is not salvation in itself, but it makes way for peace and brings you to a state of
T-22.III.4. Only the form of error attracts the ego. 2 Meaning it does not recognize, and does not
T-22.III.5. Reason will tell you that the form of error is not what makes it a mistake. 2 If what the
T-22.III.6. These eyes, made not to see, will never see. 2 For the idea they represent left not its
T-22.III.7. Only mistakes have different forms, and so they can deceive. 2 You can change form
T-22.III.8. Let not the form of his mistakes keep you from him whose holiness is yours. 2 Let not
T-22.III.9. A holy relationship, however newly born, must value holiness above all else. 2 Unholy
T-22.IV.1. When you come to the place where the branch in the road is quite apparent, you cannot
T-22.IV.2. It is but the first few steps along the right way that seem hard, for you have chosen,
T-22.IV.3. And so you and your brother stand, here in this holy place, before the veil of sin that
T-22.IV.4. Think of the loveliness that you will see, who walk with Him! 2 And think how beautiful
T-22.IV.5. Every mistake you and your brother make, the other will gently have corrected for you. 2
T-22.IV.6. To all who share the Love of God the grace is given to be the givers of what they have
T-22.IV.7. How easy is it to offer this miracle to everyone! 2 No one who has received it for
T-22.V.1. How does one overcome illusions? 2 Surely not by force or anger, nor by opposing them
T-22.V.2. Consider what the ego wants defenses for. 2 Always to justify what goes against the
T-22.V.3. Yet how can peace be so fragmented? 2 It is still whole, and nothing has been taken from
T-22.V.4. How weak is fear; how little and how meaningless. 2 How insignificant before the quiet
T-22.V.5. If you but recognized how little stands between you and your awareness of your union
T-22.V.6. Forget not, when you feel the need arise to be defensive about anything, you have
T-22.VI.1. Do you want freedom of the body or of the mind? 2 For both you cannot have. 3 Which
T-22.VI.2. Where freedom of the body has been chosen, the mind is used as means whose value lies
T-22.VI.3. Be not disturbed at all to think how He can change the role of means and end so easily in
T-22.VI.4. This holy relationship, lovely in its innocence, mighty in strength, and blazing with a
T-22.VI.5. Before a holy relationship there is no sin. 2 The form of error is no longer seen, and
T-22.VI.6. Child of peace, the light has come to you. 2 The light you bring you do not recognize,
T-22.VI.7. When you have looked upon your brother with complete forgiveness, from which no
T-22.VI.8. You will see your value through your brother's eyes, and each one is released as he
T-22.VI.9. What can it be but universal blessing to look on what your Father loves with charity? 2
T-22.VI.10. On your learning depends the welfare of the world. 2 And it is only arrogance that
T-22.VI.11. Who can attack the Son of God and not attack his Father? 2 How can God's Son be
T-22.VI.12. If you were one with God and recognized this oneness, you would know His power is
T-22.VI.13. Only the different can attack. 2 So you conclude because you can attack, you and your
T-22.VI.14. This is the function of your holy relationship. 2 For what one thinks, the other will
T-22.VI.15. The light that joins you and your brother shines throughout the universe, and because it
T-23.in.1. Do you not see the opposite of frailty and weakness is sinlessness? 2 Innocence is
T-23.in.2. How strange indeed becomes this war against yourself! 2 You will believe that everything
T-23.in.3. Walk you in glory, with your head held high, and fear no evil. 2 The innocent are safe
T-23.in.4. Let not the little interferers pull you to littleness. 2 There can be no attraction of guilt in
T-23.in.5. Let us not let littleness lead God's Son into temptation. 2 His glory is beyond it,
T-23.in.6. Nothing around you but is part of you. 2 Look on it lovingly, and see the light of Heaven
T-23.I.1. The memory of God comes to the quiet mind. 2 It cannot come where there is conflict, for
T-23.I.2. Do you not realize a war against yourself would be a war on God? 2 Is victory
T-23.I.3. Be certain that it is impossible God and the ego, or yourself and it, will ever meet. 2 You
T-23.I.4. Brother, the war against yourself is almost over. 2 The journey's end is at the place of
T-23.I.5. The war against yourself was undertaken to teach the Son of God that he is not himself,
T-23.I.6. The war against yourself is but the battle of two illusions, struggling to make them
T-23.I.7. What you remember is a part of you. 2 For you must be as God created you. 3 Truth does
T-23.I.8. Conflict must be between two forces. 2 It cannot exist between one power and
T-23.I.9. See how the conflict of illusions disappears when it is brought to truth! 2 For it seems real
T-23.I.10. You who are beloved of Him are no illusion, being as true and holy as Himself. 2 The
T-23.I.11. How can the resting place of God turn on itself, and seek to overcome the One Who
T-23.I.12. Illusion meets illusion; truth, itself. 2 The meeting of illusions leads to war. 3 Peace,
T-23.II.1. The "laws" of chaos can be brought to light, though never understood. 2 Chaotic laws are
T-23.II.2. The first chaotic law is that the truth is different for everyone. 2 Like all these principles,
T-23.II.3. Think how this seems to interfere with the first principle of miracles. 2 For this
T-23.II.4. The second law of chaos, dear indeed to every worshipper of sin, is that each one must
T-23.II.5. Think what this seems to do to the relationship between the Father and the Son. 2 Now it
T-23.II.6. The arrogance on which the laws of chaos stand could not be more apparent than emerges
T-23.II.7. See how the fear of God is reinforced by this third principle. 2 Now it becomes
T-23.II.8. There can be no release and no escape. 2 Atonement thus becomes a myth, and
T-23.II.9. The ego values only what it takes. 2 This leads to the fourth law of chaos, which, if the
T-23.II.10. All of the mechanisms of madness are seen emerging here: the "enemy" made strong by
T-23.II.11. And now there is a vague unanswered question, not yet "explained." 2 What is this
T-23.II.12. But what is it you want that needs his death? 2 Can you be sure your murderous attack is
T-23.II.13. Never is your possession made complete. 2 And never will your brother cease his attack
T-23.II.14. No one wants madness, nor does anyone cling to his madness if he sees that this is what
T-23.II.15. These do not seem to be the goals of chaos, for by the great reversal they appear to be
T-23.II.16. And yet, how can it be that laws like these can be believed? 2 There is a strange device
T-23.II.17. How can some forms of murder not mean death? 2 Can an attack in any form be love? 3
T-23.II.18. You would maintain, and think it true, that you do not believe these senseless laws, nor
T-23.II.19. There is no life outside of Heaven. 2 Where God created life, there life must be. 3 In any
T-23.II.20. The laws of chaos govern all illusions. 2 Their forms conflict, making it seem quite
T-23.II.21. From the belief in sin, the faith in chaos must follow. 2 It is because it follows that it
T-23.II.22. Brother, take not one step in the descent to hell. 2 For having taken one, you will not
T-23.III.1. Is it not true you do not recognize some of the forms attack can take? 2 If it is true attack
T-23.III.2. Is death in any form, however lovely and charitable it may seem to be, a blessing and a
T-23.III.3. Salvation is no compromise of any kind. 2 To compromise is to accept but part of what
T-23.III.4. This course is easy just because it makes no compromise. 2 Yet it seems difficult to those
T-23.III.5. Those who believe that peace can be defended, and that attack is justified on its behalf,
T-23.III.6. Mistake not truce for peace, nor compromise for the escape from conflict. 2 To be
T-23.IV.1. Do not remain in conflict, for there is no war without attack. 2 The fear of God is fear of
T-23.IV.2. What can be equal to the truth, yet different? 2 Murder and love are incompatible. 3 Yet
T-23.IV.3. God does not share His function with a body. 2 He gave the function to create unto His
T-23.IV.4. The lovely light of your relationship is like the Love of God. 2 It cannot yet assume the
T-23.IV.5. Be lifted up, and from a higher place look down upon it. 2 From there will your
T-23.IV.6. When the temptation to attack rises to make your mind darkened and murderous,
T-23.IV.7. See no one from the battleground, for there you look on him from nowhere. 2 You have
T-23.IV.8. Think what is given those who share their Father's purpose, and who know that it is
T-23.IV.9. Those with the strength of God in their awareness could never think of battle. 2 What
T-24.in.1. Forget not that the motivation for this course is the attainment and the keeping of the
T-24.in.2. To learn this course requires willingness to question every value that you hold. 2 Not one
T-24.I.1. Love is extension. 2 To withhold the smallest gift is not to know love's purpose. 3 Love
T-24.I.2. Beliefs will never openly attack each other because conflicting outcomes are impossible. 2
T-24.I.3. All that is ever cherished as a hidden belief, to be defended though unrecognized, is faith
T-24.I.4. What God created cannot be attacked, for there is nothing in the universe unlike itself. 2
T-24.I.5. Specialness is the great dictator of the wrong decisions. 2 Here is the grand illusion of
T-24.I.6. Would it be possible for you to hate your brother if you were like him? 2 Could you attack
T-24.I.7. Your brother is your friend because his Father created him like you. 2 There is no
T-24.I.8. The fear of God and of your brother comes from each unrecognized belief in specialness.
T-24.I.9. Those who are special must defend illusions against the truth. 2 For what is specialness
T-24.II.1. Comparison must be an ego device, for love makes none. 2 Specialness always makes
T-24.II.2. Pursuit of specialness is always at the cost of peace. 2 Who can attack his savior and cut
T-24.II.3. Specialness is the idea of sin made real. 2 Sin is impossible even to imagine without this
T-24.II.4. You are not special. 2 If you think you are, and would defend your specialness against the
T-24.II.5. You can defend your specialness, but never will you hear the Voice for God beside it. 2
T-24.II.6. What would they see instead? 2 The shining radiance of the Son of God, so like his
T-24.II.7. You who have chained your savior to your specialness, and given it his place, remember
T-24.II.8. Think of the loveliness that you will see within yourself, when you have looked on him as
T-24.II.9. You have come far along the way of truth; too far to falter now. 2 Just one step more, and
T-24.II.10. Here is your savior from your specialness. 2 He is in need of your acceptance of himself
T-24.II.11. You are your brother's; part of love was not denied to him. 2 But can it be that you have
T-24.II.12. Specialness is the seal of treachery upon the gift of love. 2 Whatever serves its purpose
T-24.II.13. The hope of specialness makes it seem possible God made the body as the prison house
T-24.II.14. The key you threw away God gave your brother, whose holy hands would offer it to you
T-24.III.1. Forgiveness is the end of specialness. 2 Only illusions can be forgiven, and then they
T-24.III.2. Whatever form of specialness you cherish, you have made sin. 2 Inviolate it stands,
T-24.III.3. It is not you who are so vulnerable and open to attack that just a word, a little whisper
T-24.III.4. Without foundation nothing is secure. 2 Would God have left His Son in such a state,
T-24.III.5. God asks for your forgiveness. 2 He would have no separation, like an alien will, rise
T-24.III.6. Forgive the great Creator of the universe, the Source of life, of love and holiness, the
T-24.III.7. The special ones are all asleep, surrounded by a world of loveliness they do not see. 2
T-24.III.8. The slaves of specialness will yet be free. 2 Such is the Will of God and of His Son. 3
T-24.IV.1. Specialness is a lack of trust in anyone except yourself. 2 Faith is invested in yourself
T-24.IV.2. What could the purpose of the body be but specialness? 2 And it is this that makes it frail
T-24.IV.3. You can but hurt yourself. 2 This has been oft repeated, but is difficult to grasp as yet. 3
T-24.IV.4. Earlier I said consider not the means by which salvation is attained, nor how to reach it.
T-24.IV.5. Do not defend this senseless dream, in which God is bereft of what He loves, and you
T-24.V.1. The Christ in you is very still. 2 He looks on what He loves, and knows it as Himself. 3
T-24.V.2. There is no dream of specialness, however hidden or disguised the form, however lovely
T-24.V.3. Where could your peace arise but from forgiveness? 2 The Christ in you looks only on
T-24.V.4. Yet let your specialness direct his way, and you will follow. 2 And both will walk in
T-24.V.5. Rejoice you have no eyes with which to see; no ears to listen, and no hands to hold nor
T-24.V.6. The Christ in you is very still. 2 He knows where you are going, and He leads you there
T-24.V.7. Yet is He quiet, for He knows that love is in you now, and safely held in you by that same
T-24.V.8. You who would be content with specialness, and seek salvation in a war with love,
T-24.V.9. There must be doubt before there can be conflict. 2 And every doubt must be about
T-24.VI.1. Before your brother's holiness the world is still, and peace descends on it in gentleness
T-24.VI.2. Without you there would be a lack in God, a Heaven incomplete, a Son without a Father.
T-24.VI.3. Nothing is lost to you in all the universe. 2 Nothing that God created has He failed to lay
T-24.VI.4. Forget not that the healing of God's Son is all the world is for. 2 That is the only purpose
T-24.VI.5. Look on your brother, and behold in him the whole reversal of the laws that seem to rule
T-24.VI.6. It is His sinlessness that eyes that see can look upon. 2 It is His loveliness they see in
T-24.VI.7. Choose, then, his body or his holiness as what you want to see, and which you choose is
T-24.VI.8. Your brother's holiness is sacrament and benediction unto you. 2 His errors cannot
T-24.VI.9. See him as what he is, that your deliverance may not be long. 2 A senseless wandering,
T-24.VI.10. Would you not gladly realize these laws are not for you? 2 Then see him not as prisoner
T-24.VI.11. Specialness is the function that you gave yourself. 2 It stands for you alone, as self-created, self-maintained, in need of nothing, and unjoined with anything beyond the body. 3 In its
T-24.VI.12. Now you are merely asked that you pursue another goal with far less vigilance; with
T-24.VI.13. You who believe it easier to see your brother's body than his holiness, be sure you
T-24.VII.1. How bitterly does everyone tied to this world defend the specialness he wants to be the
T-24.VII.2. The memory of God shines not alone. 2 What is within your brother still contains all of
T-24.VII.3. How can you know your worth while specialness claims you instead? 2 How can you
T-24.VII.4. Ask yourself this: Can you protect the mind? 2 The body, yes, a little; not from time,
T-24.VII.5. The Father keeps what He created safe. 2 You cannot touch it with the false ideas you
T-24.VII.6. The test of everything on earth is simply this; "What is it for ?" 2 The answer makes it
T-24.VII.7. A co-creator with the Father must have a Son. 2 Yet must this Son have been created
T-24.VII.8. This course makes no attempt to teach what cannot easily be learned. 2 Its scope does
T-24.VII.9. Look at yourself, and you will see a body. 2 Look at this body in a different light and it
T-24.VII.10. Thus is the body made a theory of yourself, with no provisions made for evidence
T-24.VII.11. And thus are two sons made, and both appear to walk this earth without a meeting
T-25.in.1. The Christ in you inhabits not a body. 2 Yet He is in you. 3 And thus it must be that you
T-25.in.2. No one who carries Christ in him can fail to recognize Him everywhere. 2 Except in
T-25.in.3. The body needs no healing. 2 But the mind that thinks it is a body is sick indeed! 3 And it
T-25.I.1. It cannot be that it is hard to do the task that Christ appointed you to do, since it is He Who
T-25.I.2. How can you manifest the Christ in you except to look on holiness and see Him there? 2
T-25.I.3. Perception is a choice of what you want yourself to be; the world you want to live in, and
T-25.I.4. You are the means for God; not separate, nor with a life apart from His. 2 His life is
T-25.I.5. Since you believe that you are separate, Heaven presents itself to you as separate, too. 2
T-25.I.6. The Holy Spirit serves Christ's purpose in your mind, so that the aim of specialness can be
T-25.I.7. All this takes note of time and place as if they were discrete, for while you think that part
T-25.II.1. Is it not evident that what the body's eyes perceive fills you with fear? 2 Perhaps you
T-25.II.2. Is it not strange that you should cherish still some hope of satisfaction from the world you
T-25.II.3. Is it not also true that you have found some hope apart from this; some glimmering,--inconstant, wavering, yet dimly seen,--that hopefulness is warranted on grounds that are not in this
T-25.II.4. Its past has failed. 2 Be glad that it is gone within your mind, to darken what is there. 3
T-25.II.5. Who hangs an empty frame upon a wall and stands before it, deep in reverence, as if a
T-25.II.6. The Holy Spirit is the frame God set around the part of Him that you would see as
T-25.II.7. Accept God's frame instead of yours, and you will see the masterpiece. 2 Look at its
T-25.II.8. Within the darkness see the savior from the dark, and understand your brother as his
T-25.II.9. How could the Lord of Heaven not be glad if you appreciate His masterpiece? 2 What
T-25.II.10. Forgive your brother, and you cannot separate yourself from him nor from his Father. 2
T-25.II.11. You and your brother are the same, as God Himself is One and not divided in His Will.
T-25.III.1. To the extent to which you value guilt, to that extent will you perceive a world in which
T-25.III.2. God's laws do not obtain directly to a world perception rules, for such a world could not
T-25.III.3. Perception rests on choosing; knowledge does not. 2 Knowledge has but one law because
T-25.III.4. There is another Maker of the world, the simultaneous Corrector of the mad belief that
T-25.III.5. There is another purpose in the world that error made, because it has another Maker Who
T-25.III.6. Everyone here has entered darkness, yet no one has entered it alone. 2 Nor need he stay
T-25.III.7. How can a misperception be a sin? 2 Let all your brother's errors be to you nothing
T-25.III.8. The Maker of the world of gentleness has perfect power to offset the world of violence
T-25.III.9. The Son of God could never sin, but he can wish for what would hurt him. 2 And he has
T-25.IV.1. Minds that are joined and recognize they are, can feel no guilt. 2 For they cannot attack,
T-25.IV.2. Perception's basic law could thus be said, "You will rejoice at what you see because you
T-25.IV.3. You maker of a world that is not so, take rest and comfort in another world where peace
T-25.IV.4. Would you not do this for the Love of God? 2 And for yourself? 3 For think what it
T-25.IV.5. In you is all of Heaven. 2 Every leaf that falls is given life in you. 3 Each bird that ever
T-25.V.1. The state of sinlessness is merely this: The whole desire to attack is gone, and so there is
T-25.V.2. Attack makes Christ your enemy, and God along with Him. 2 Must you not be afraid with
T-25.V.3. It is not Christ you see by looking thus. 2 It is the "enemy," confused with Christ, you
T-25.V.4. The Son of God asks only this of you; that you return to him what is his due, that you
T-25.V.5. It is no sacrifice that he be saved, for by his freedom will you gain your own. 2 To let his
T-25.V.6. Against the hatred that the Son of God may cherish toward himself, is God believed to be
T-25.VI.1. The grace of God rests gently on forgiving eyes, and everything they look on speaks of
T-25.VI.2. Eyes become used to darkness, and the light of brilliant day seems painful to the eyes
T-25.VI.3. The wish to see calls down the grace of God upon your eyes, and brings the gift of light
T-25.VI.4. Such is the Holy Spirit's kind perception of specialness; His use of what you made, to
T-25.VI.5. Here, where the laws of God do not prevail in perfect form, can he yet do one perfect
T-25.VI.6. Salvation is no more than a reminder this world is not your home. 2 Its laws are not
T-25.VI.7. The Holy Spirit needs your special function, that His may be fulfilled. 2 Think not you
T-25.VII.1. Yet if the Holy Spirit can commute each sentence that you laid upon yourself into a
T-25.VII.2. It cannot be the "sinner's" wish for death is just as strong as is God's Will for life. 2 Nor
T-25.VII.3. Let us go back to what we said before, and think of it more carefully. 2 It must be so
T-25.VII.4. To justify one value that the world upholds is to deny your Father's sanity and yours. 2
T-25.VII.5. The Holy Spirit has the power to change the whole foundation of the world you see to
T-25.VII.6. Test everything that you believe against this one requirement, and understand that
T-25.VII.7. Your special function is the special form in which the fact that God is not insane
T-25.VII.8. It would be madness to entrust salvation to the insane. 2 Because He is not mad has
T-25.VII.9. Now must he question this, because the form of the alternative is one which he cannot
T-25.VII.10. What is dependable except God's Love? 2 And where does sanity abide except in
T-25.VII.11. The whole belief that someone loses but reflects the underlying tenet God must be
T-25.VII.12. Salvation is rebirth of the idea no one can lose for anyone to gain. 2 And everyone
T-25.VII.13. Remember all temptation is but this; a mad belief that God's insanity would make you
T-25.VIII.1. The Holy Spirit can use all that you give to Him for your salvation. 2 But He cannot
T-25.VIII.2. Here is the only principle salvation needs. 2 Nor is it necessary that your faith in it be
T-25.VIII.3. There is a kind of justice in salvation of which the world knows nothing. 2 To the
T-25.VIII.4. You who know not of justice still can ask, and learn the answer. 2 Justice looks on all
T-25.VIII.5. Can this be justice? 2 God knows not of this. 3 But justice does He know, and knows it
T-25.VIII.6. It is extremely hard for those who still believe sin meaningful to understand the Holy
T-25.VIII.7. So do they think the loss of sin a curse. 2 And flee the Holy Spirit as if He were a
T-25.VIII.8. Yet justice cannot punish those who ask for punishment, but have a Judge Who knows
T-25.VIII.9. What can Love ask of you who think that all of this is true? 2 Could He, in justice and
T-25.VIII.10. To him who merits everything, how can it be that anything be kept from him? 2 For
T-25.VIII.11. As specialness cares not who pays the cost of sin, so it be paid, the Holy Spirit heeds
T-25.VIII.12. You can be perfect witness to the power of love and justice, if you understand it is
T-25.VIII.13. Without impartiality there is no justice. 2 How can specialness be just? 3 Judge not
T-25.VIII.14. You have the right to all the universe; to perfect peace, complete deliverance from all
T-25.IX.1. What can it be but arrogance to think your little errors cannot be undone by Heaven's
T-25.IX.2. To give reluctantly is not to gain the gift, because you are reluctant to accept it. 2 It is
T-25.IX.3. Be certain any answer to a problem the Holy Spirit solves will always be one in which
T-25.IX.4. The sight of innocence makes punishment impossible, and justice sure. 2 The Holy
T-25.IX.5. The Holy Spirit's problem solving is the way in which the problem ends. 2 It has been
T-25.IX.6. No one deserves to lose. 2 And what would be unjust to him cannot occur. 3 Healing
T-25.IX.7. Salvation cannot seek to help God's Son be more unfair than he has sought to be. 2 If
T-25.IX.8. Unless you think that all your brothers have an equal right to miracles with you, you will
T-25.IX.9. The little problems that you keep and hide become your secret sins, because you did not
T-25.IX.10. The miracle that you receive, you give. 2 Each one becomes an illustration of the law
T-26.I.1. In the "dynamics" of attack is sacrifice a key idea. 2 It is the pivot upon which all
T-26.I.2. The world you see is based on "sacrifice" of oneness. 2 It is a picture of complete disunity
T-26.I.3. The little that the body fences off becomes the self, preserved through sacrifice of all the
T-26.I.4. The body is a loss, and can be made to sacrifice. 2 And while you see your brother as a
T-26.I.5. Those who would see the witnesses to truth instead of to illusion merely ask that they
T-26.I.6. You can lose sight of oneness, but can not make sacrifice of its reality. 2 Nor can you lose
T-26.I.7. Yet every instant can you be reborn, and given life again. 2 His holiness gives life to you,
T-26.I.8. God's justice rests in gentleness upon His Son, and keeps him safe from all injustice the
T-26.II.1. It is not difficult to understand the reasons why you do not ask the Holy Spirit to solve all
T-26.II.2. The Holy Spirit offers you release from every problem that you think you have. 2 They
T-26.II.3. This one mistake, in any form, has one correction. 2 There is no loss; to think there is, is
T-26.II.4. The miracle of justice can correct all errors. 2 Every problem is an error. 3 It does
T-26.II.5. You who believe it safe to give but some mistakes to be corrected while you keep the
T-26.II.6. If God is just, then can there be no problems that justice cannot solve. 2 But you believe
T-26.II.7. Think, then, how great your own release will be when you are willing to receive
T-26.II.8. God cannot be remembered until justice is loved instead of feared. 2 He cannot be unjust
T-26.III.1. Complexity is not of God. 2 How could it be, when all He knows is One? 3 He knows of
T-26.III.2. There is a borderland of thought that stands between this world and Heaven. 2 It is not a
T-26.III.3. This is the journey's end. 2 We have referred to it as the real world. 3 And yet there is a
T-26.III.4. Nothing the Son of God believes can be destroyed. 2 But what is truth to him must be
T-26.III.5. Salvation stops just short of Heaven, for only perception needs salvation. 2 Heaven was
T-26.III.6. There is no basis for a choice in this complex and overcomplicated world. 2 For no one
T-26.III.7. Is not this like your special function, where the separation is undone by change of
T-26.IV.1. Forgiveness is this world's equivalent of Heaven's justice. 2 It translates the world of sin
T-26.IV.2. Forgiveness turns the world of sin into a world of glory, wonderful to see. 2 Each flower
T-26.IV.3. The holy place on which you stand is but the space that sin has left. 2 And here you see
T-26.IV.4. Forgiveness brings no little miracles to lay before the gate of Heaven. 2 Here the Son of
T-26.IV.5. Where sin once was perceived will rise a world that will become an altar to the truth,
T-26.IV.6. This tiny spot of sin that stands between you and your brother still is holding back the
T-26.V.1. A little hindrance can seem large indeed to those who do not understand that miracles are
T-26.V.2. Nothing is ever lost but time, which in the end is meaningless. 2 For it is but a little
T-26.V.3. God gave His Teacher to replace the one you made, not to conflict with it. 2 And what
T-26.V.4. To you who still believe you live in time and know not it is gone, the Holy Spirit still
T-26.V.5. The tiny instant you would keep and make eternal, passed away in Heaven too soon for
T-26.V.6. Forgiveness is the great release from time. 2 It is the key to learning that the past is over.
T-26.V.7. Is this a hindrance to the place whereon he stands? 2 Is any echo from the past that he
T-26.V.8. The unforgiven is a voice that calls from out a past forevermore gone by. 2 And
T-26.V.9. Forget the time of terror that has been so long ago corrected and undone. 2 Can sin
T-26.V.10. Would God allow His Son to lose his way along a road long since a memory of time
T-26.V.11. The Son whom God created is as free as God created him. 2 He was reborn the instant
T-26.V.12. The shadow voices do not change the laws of time nor of eternity. 2 They come from
T-26.V.13. Each day, and every minute in each day, and every instant that each minute holds, you
T-26.V.14. Forgive the past and let it go, for it is gone. 2 You stand no longer on the ground that lies
T-26.VI.1. Anything in this world that you believe is good and valuable and worth striving for can
T-26.VI.2. Lead not your little life in solitude, with one illusion as your only friend. 2 This is no
T-26.VI.3. Who dwells with shadows is alone indeed, and loneliness is not the Will of God. 2
T-26.VII.1. This is a course in miracles. 2 As such, the laws of healing must be understood before
T-26.VII.2. All sickness comes from separation. 2 When the separation is denied, it goes. 3 For it is
T-26.VII.3. Guilt asks for punishment, and its request is granted. 2 Not in truth, but in the world of
T-26.VII.4. Perception's laws are opposite to truth, and what is true of knowledge is not true of
T-26.VII.5. God's answer lies where the belief in sin must be, for only there can its effects be
T-26.VII.6. It is impossible that one illusion be less amenable to truth than are the rest. 2 But it is
T-26.VII.7. Sin is not error, for it goes beyond correction to impossibility. 2 Yet the belief that it is
T-26.VII.8. Nothing gives meaning where no meaning is. 2 And truth needs no defense to make it
T-26.VII.9. Forgiveness takes away what stands between your brother and yourself. 2 It is the wish
T-26.VII.10. Salvation, perfect and complete, asks but a little wish that what is true be true; a little
T-26.VII.11. What is the Will of God? 2 He wills His Son have everything. 3 And this He
T-26.VII.12. Let us consider what the error is, so it can be corrected, not protected. 2 Sin is belief
T-26.VII.13. Cause and effect are one, not separate. 2 God wills you learn what always has been
T-26.VII.14. The miracle is possible when cause and consequence are brought together, not kept
T-26.VII.15. Illusions serve the purpose they were made to serve. 2 And from their purpose they
T-26.VII.16. The miracle but calls your ancient Name, which you will recognize because the truth is
T-26.VII.17. In crucifixion is redemption laid, for healing is not needed where there is no pain or
T-26.VII.18. To use the power God has given you as He would have it used is natural. 2 It is not
T-26.VII.19. Abide in peace, where God would have you be. 2 And be the means whereby your
T-26.VII.20. Your ancient Name belongs to everyone, as theirs to you. 2 Call on your brother's
T-26.VIII.1. The one remaining problem that you have is that you see an interval between the time
T-26.VIII.2. There is a distance you would keep apart from your brother, and this space you
T-26.VIII.3. Salvation is immediate. 2 Unless you so perceive it, you will be afraid of it, believing
T-26.VIII.4. Yet space between you and your brother is apparent only in the present, now, and
T-26.VIII.5. The plans you make for safety all are laid within the future, where you cannot plan. 2
T-26.VIII.6. The working out of all correction takes no time at all. 2 Yet the acceptance of the
T-26.VIII.7. Why should the good appear in evil's form? 2 And is it not deception if it does? 3 Its
T-26.VIII.8. Yet this illusion has a cause which, though untrue, must be already in your mind. 2
T-26.VIII.9. Be not content with future happiness. 2 It has no meaning, and is not your just reward.
T-26.IX.1. Think but how holy you must be from whom the Voice for God calls lovingly unto your
T-26.IX.2. Is it too much to ask a little trust for him who carries Christ to you, that you may be
T-26.IX.3. The blood of hatred fades to let the grass grow green again, and let the flowers be all
T-26.IX.4. What is a hundred or a thousand years to Them, or tens of thousands? 2 When They
T-26.IX.5. Heaven is grateful for this gift of what has been withheld so long. 2 For They have come
T-26.IX.6. The holiest of all the spots on earth is where an ancient hatred has become a present
T-26.IX.7. Around you angels hover lovingly, to keep away all darkened thoughts of sin, and keep
T-26.IX.8. Now is the temple of the living God rebuilt as host again to Him by Whom it was
T-26.X.1. What, then, remains to be undone for you to realize Their Presence? 2 Only this; you
T-26.X.2. What does it mean if you perceive attack in certain forms to be unfair to you? 2 It means
T-26.X.3. Unfairness and attack are one mistake, so firmly joined that where one is perceived the
T-26.X.4. Beware of the temptation to perceive yourself unfairly treated. 2 In this view, you seek to
T-26.X.5. You think your brother is unfair to you because you think that one must be unfair to make
T-26.X.6. What this injustice does to you who judge unfairly, and who see as you have judged, you
T-27.I.1. The wish to be unfairly treated is a compromise attempt that would combine attack and
T-27.I.2. In your release from sacrifice is his made manifest, and shown to be his own. 2 But every
T-27.I.3. Whenever you consent to suffer pain, to be deprived, unfairly treated or in need of
T-27.I.4. The power of witness is beyond belief because it brings conviction in its wake. 2 The
T-27.I.5. Now in the hands made gentle by His touch, the Holy Spirit lays a picture of a different
T-27.I.6. Attest his innocence and not his guilt. 2 Your healing is his comfort and his health because
T-27.I.7. The strongest witness to futility, that bolsters all the rest and helps them paint the picture in
T-27.I.8. These are not sins, but witnesses unto the strange belief that sin and death are real, and
T-27.I.9. Your function is to show your brother sin can have no cause. 2 How futile must it be to
T-27.I.10. Into this empty space, from which the goal of sin has been removed, is Heaven free to be
T-27.I.11. The simple way to let this be achieved is merely this; to let the body have no purpose
T-27.II.1. Is healing frightening? 2 To many, yes. 3 For accusation is a bar to love, and damaged
T-27.II.2. The unhealed cannot pardon. 2 For they are the witnesses that pardon is unfair. 3 They
T-27.II.3. To witness sin and yet forgive it is a paradox that reason cannot see. 2 For it maintains
T-27.II.4. Forgiveness is not real unless it brings a healing to your brother and yourself. 2 You must
T-27.II.5. A broken body shows the mind has not been healed. 2 A miracle of healing proves that
T-27.II.6. A miracle can offer nothing less to him than it has given unto you. 2 So does your healing
T-27.II.7. How just are miracles! 2 For they bestow an equal gift of full deliverance from guilt upon
T-27.II.8. The "cost" of your serenity is his. 2 This is the "price" the Holy Spirit and the world
T-27.II.9. Who, then, fears healing? 2 Only those to whom their brother's sacrifice and pain are seen
T-27.II.10. Correction is not your function. 2 It belongs to One Who knows of fairness, not of guilt.
T-27.II.11. In a split mind, identity must seem to be divided. 2 Nor can anyone perceive a function
T-27.II.12. Correction you would do must separate, because that is the function given it by you. 2
T-27.II.13. Consider how this self-perception must extend, and do not overlook the fact that every
T-27.II.14. In this interpretation of correction, your own mistakes you will not even see. 2 The focus
T-27.II.15. Correction is the function given both, but neither one alone. 2 And when it is fulfilled as
T-27.II.16. Correction must be left to One Who knows correction and forgiveness are the same. 2
T-27.III.1. Power cannot oppose. 2 For opposition would weaken it, and weakened power is a
T-27.III.2. You have decided that your brother is a symbol for a "hateful love," a "weakened
T-27.III.3. The picture of your brother that you see means nothing. 2 There is nothing to attack or to
T-27.III.4. An empty space that is not seen as filled, an unused interval of time not seen as spent
T-27.III.5. As nothingness cannot be pictured, so there is no symbol for totality. 2 Reality is
T-27.III.6. The picture of your brother given you to occupy the space so lately left unoccupied and
T-27.III.7. Forgiveness vanishes and symbols fade, and nothing that the eyes have ever seen or ears
T-27.IV.1. In quietness are all things answered, and is every problem quietly resolved. 2 In conflict
T-27.IV.2. Thus it must be that time is not involved and every problem can be answered now. 2 Yet
T-27.IV.3. Attempt to solve no problems but within the holy instant's surety. 2 For there the
T-27.IV.4. All questions asked within this world are but a way of looking, not a question asked. 2 A
T-27.IV.5. A pseudo-question has no answer. 2 It dictates the answer even as it asks. 3 Thus is all
T-27.IV.6. Only within the holy instant can an honest question honestly be asked. 2 And from the
T-27.IV.7. Therefore, attempt to solve no problems in a world from which the answer has been
T-27.V.1. The only way to heal is to be healed. 2 The miracle extends without your help, but you
T-27.V.2. Health is the witness unto health. 2 As long as it is unattested, it remains without
T-27.V.3. The holy instant is the miracle's abiding place. 2 From there, each one is born into this
T-27.V.4. There is no sadness where a miracle has come to heal. 2 And nothing more than just one
T-27.V.5. Would not a world so bitterly bereft be looked on as a condemnation by the one who
T-27.V.6. Come to the holy instant and be healed, for nothing that is there received is left behind on
T-27.V.7. Thus is your healing everything the world requires, that it may be healed. 2 It needs one
T-27.V.8. Problems are not specific but they take specific forms, and these specific shapes make up
T-27.V.9. Your healing will extend, and will be brought to problems that you thought were not your
T-27.V.10. Leave, then, the transfer of your learning to the One Who really understands its laws,
T-27.V.11. Peace be to you to whom is healing offered. 2 And you will learn that peace is given you
T-27.VI.1. Pain demonstrates the body must be real. 2 It is a loud, obscuring voice whose shrieks
T-27.VI.2. Sin shifts from pain to pleasure, and again to pain. 2 For either witness is the same, and
T-27.VI.3. This body, purposeless within itself, holds all your memories and all your hopes. 2 You
T-27.VI.4. God's Witness sees no witnesses against the body. 2 Neither does He harken to the
T-27.VI.5. The miracle makes no distinctions in the names by which sin's witnesses are called. 2 It
T-27.VI.6. Love, too, has symbols in a world of sin. 2 The miracle forgives because it stands for
T-27.VI.7. Be you then witness to the miracle, and not the laws of sin. 2 There is no need to suffer
T-27.VI.8. The resurrection of the world awaits your healing and your happiness, that you may
T-27.VII.1. Suffering is an emphasis upon all that the world has done to injure you. 2 Here is the
T-27.VII.2. Now you are being shown you can escape. 2 All that is needed is you look upon the
T-27.VII.3. The "reasoning" by which the world is made, on which it rests, by which it is
T-27.VII.4. There is indeed a need. 2 The world's escape from condemnation is a need which those
T-27.VII.5. This is the purpose of the world he sees. 2 And looked at thus, the world provides the
T-27.VII.6. The part you play in salvaging the world from condemnation is your own escape. 2
T-27.VII.7. The witnesses to sin all stand within one little space. 2 And it is here you find the cause
T-27.VII.8. No one can waken from a dream the world is dreaming for him. 2 He becomes a part of
T-27.VII.9. This is the only picture you can see; the one alternative that you can choose, the other
T-27.VII.10. What could you choose between but life or death, waking or sleeping, peace or war,
T-27.VII.11. What choices can be made between two states, but one of which is clearly recognized?
T-27.VII.12. A brother separated from yourself, an ancient enemy, a murderer who stalks you in the
T-27.VII.13. You are the dreamer of the world of dreams. 2 No other cause it has, nor ever will. 3
T-27.VII.14. Accept the dream He gave instead of yours. 2 It is not difficult to change a dream
T-27.VII.15. Dream softly of your sinless brother, who unites with you in holy innocence. 2 And
T-27.VII.16. Brother, He gives but life. 2 Yet what you see as gifts your brother offers represent the
T-27.VIII.1. The body is the central figure in the dreaming of the world. 2 There is no dream
T-27.VIII.2. The dreaming of the world takes many forms, because the body seeks in many ways to
T-27.VIII.3. The body's serial adventures, from the time of birth to dying are the theme of every
T-27.VIII.4. Thus are you not the dreamer, but the dream. 2 And so you wander idly in and out of
T-27.VIII.5. How willing are you to escape effects of all the dreams the world has ever had? 2 Is it
T-27.VIII.6. Let us return the dream he gave away unto the dreamer, who perceives the dream as
T-27.VIII.7. A timelessness in which is time made real; a part of God that can attack itself; a
T-27.VIII.8. The world but demonstrates an ancient truth; you will believe that others do to you
T-27.VIII.9. In gentle laughter does the Holy Spirit perceive the cause, and looks not to effects. 2
T-27.VIII.10. The secret of salvation is but this: that you are doing this unto yourself. 2 No matter
T-27.VIII.11. This single lesson learned will set you free from suffering, whatever form it takes. 2
T-27.VIII.12. Bring, then, all forms of suffering to Him Who knows that every one is like the rest. 2
T-27.VIII.13. How differently will you perceive the world when this is recognized! 2 When you
T-28.I.1. The miracle does nothing. 2 All it does is to undo. 3 And thus it cancels out the
T-28.I.2. All the effects of guilt are here no more. 2 For guilt is over. 3 In its passing went its
T-28.I.3. Nothing employed for healing represents an effort to do anything at all. 2 It is a
T-28.I.4. The Holy Spirit can indeed make use of memory, for God Himself is there. 2 Yet this is
T-28.I.5. The Holy Spirit's use of memory is quite apart from time. 2 He does not seek to use it as a
T-28.I.6. Yet time is but another phase of what does nothing. 2 It works hand in hand with all the
T-28.I.7. Remember nothing that you taught yourself, for you were badly taught. 2 And who would
T-28.I.8. This is the Cause the Holy Spirit has remembered for you, when you would forget. 2 It is
T-28.I.9. What you remember never was. 2 It came from causelessness which you confused with
T-28.I.10. You who have sought to lay a judgment on your own Creator cannot understand it is not
T-28.I.11. The miracle comes quietly into the mind that stops an instant and is still. 2 It reaches
T-28.I.12. He to Whom time is given offers thanks for every quiet instant given Him. 2 For in that
T-28.I.13. How instantly the memory of God arises in the mind that has no fear to keep the memory
T-28.I.14. Now is the Son of God at last aware of present Cause and Its benign Effects. 2 Now does
T-28.I.15. What has been lost, to see the causeless not? 2 And where is sacrifice, when memory of
T-28.II.1. Without a cause there can be no effects, and yet without effects there is no cause. 2 The
T-28.II.2. Fatherhood is creation. 2 Love must be extended. 3 Purity is not confined. 4 It is the
T-28.II.3. Always in sickness does the Son of God attempt to make himself his cause, and not allow
T-28.II.4. Nothing at all has happened but that you have put yourself to sleep, and dreamed a dream
T-28.II.5. An empty storehouse, with an open door, holds all your shreds of memories and dreams.
T-28.II.6. This world is causeless, as is every dream that anyone has dreamed within the world. 2
T-28.II.7. The miracle establishes you dream a dream, and that its content is not true. 2 This is a
T-28.II.8. The separation started with the dream the Father was deprived of His Effects, and
T-28.II.9. This is the separation's final step, with which salvation, which proceeds to go the other
T-28.II.10. Like every lesson that the Holy Spirit requests you learn, the miracle is clear. 2 It
T-28.II.11. The miracle returns the cause of fear to you who made it. 2 But it also shows that,
T-28.II.12. This world is full of miracles. 2 They stand in shining silence next to every dream of
T-28.III.1. What waits in perfect certainty beyond salvation is not our concern. 2 For you have
T-28.III.2. No mind is sick until another mind agrees that they are separate. 2 And thus it is their
T-28.III.3. The miracle does nothing just because the minds are joined, and cannot separate. 2 Yet
T-28.III.4. The end of dreaming is the end of fear, and love was never in the world of dreams. 2 The
T-28.III.5. The cause of pain is separation, not the body, which is only its effect. 2 Yet separation is
T-28.III.6. God builds the bridge, but only in the space left clean and vacant by the miracle. 2 The
T-28.III.7. Count, then, the silver miracles and golden dreams of happiness as all the treasures you
T-28.III.8. Be not afraid, my child, but let your world be gently lit by miracles. 2 And where the
T-28.III.9. This is a feast unlike indeed to those the dreaming of the world has shown. 2 For here,
T-28.IV.1. Accepting the Atonement for yourself means not to give support to someone's dream of
T-28.IV.2. There is a way of finding certainty right here and now. 2 Refuse to be a part of fearful
T-28.IV.3. Like you, your brother thinks he is a dream. 2 Share not in his illusion of himself, for
T-28.IV.4. And yet, between your minds there is no gap. 2 To join his dreams is thus to meet him
T-28.IV.5. Be certain, if you do your part, he will do his, for he will join you where you stand. 2
T-28.IV.6. You share confusion and you are confused, for in the gap no stable self exists. 2 What is
T-28.IV.7. The Holy Spirit is in both your minds, and He is One because there is no gap that
T-28.IV.8. The Holy Spirit's function is to take the broken picture of the Son of God and put the
T-28.IV.9. I thank You, Father, knowing You will come to close each little gap that lies between the
T-28.IV.10. Join not your brother's dreams but join with him, and where you join His Son the Father
T-28.V.1. What is a sense of sickness but a sense of limitation? 2 Of a splitting off and separating
T-28.V.2. It is the sharing of the evil dreams of hate and malice, bitterness and death, of sin and
T-28.V.3. You share no evil dreams if you forgive the dreamer, and perceive that he is not the
T-28.V.4. You have conceived a little gap between illusions and the truth to be the place where all
T-28.V.5. What is there God created to be sick? 2 And what that He created not can be? 3 Let not
T-28.V.6. Creation proves reality because it shares the function all creation shares. 2 It is not made
T-28.V.7. You who believe there is a little gap between you and your brother, do not see that it is
T-28.VI.1. Who punishes the body is insane. 2 For here the little gap is seen, and yet it is not here. 3
T-28.VI.2. It is indeed a senseless point of view to hold responsible for sight a thing that cannot see,
T-28.VI.3. The thing you hate and fear and loathe and want, the body does not know. 2 You send it
T-28.VI.4. The body represents the gap between the little bit of mind you call your own and all the
T-28.VI.5. Sickness is anger taken out upon the body, so that it will suffer pain. 2 It is the obvious
T-28.VI.6. Let this be your agreement with each one; that you be one with him and not apart. 2 And
T-28.VII.1. God asks for nothing, and His Son, like Him, need ask for nothing. 2 For there is no
T-28.VII.2. The beautiful relationship you have with all your brothers is a part of you because it is a
T-28.VII.3. Either there is a gap between you and your brother, or you are as one. 2 There is no in
T-28.VII.4. With this as purpose is the body healed. 2 It is not used to witness to the dream of
T-28.VII.5. But never you alone. 2 This world is but the dream that you can be alone, and think
T-28.VII.6. What is the sense in seeking to be safe in what was made for danger and for fear? 2
T-28.VII.7. Your home is built upon your brother's health, upon his happiness, his sinlessness, and
T-29.I.1. There is no time, no place, no state where God is absent. 2 There is nothing to be feared. 3
T-29.I.2. Here is the fear of God most plainly seen. 2 For love is treacherous to those who fear,
T-29.I.3. The fear of God! 2 The greatest obstacle that peace must flow across has not yet gone. 3
T-29.I.4. The gap between you and your brother is not one of space between two separate bodies. 2
T-29.I.5. The body could not separate your mind from your brother's unless you wanted it to be a
T-29.I.6. The body will accommodate to this, if you would have it so. 2 It will allow but limited
T-29.I.7. It is not love that asks a sacrifice. 2 But fear demands the sacrifice of love, for in love's
T-29.I.8. The body, innocent of goals, is your excuse for variable goals you hold, and force the body
T-29.I.9. Yet all that happens when the gap is gone is peace eternal. 2 Nothing more than that, and
T-29.II.1. Why would you not perceive it as release from suffering to learn that you are free? 2 Why
T-29.II.2. You have accepted healing's cause, and so it must be you are healed. 2 And being healed,
T-29.II.3. It has been hopeless to attempt to find the hope of peace upon a battleground. 2 It has
T-29.II.4. Your Guest has come. 2 You asked Him, and He came. 3 You did not hear Him enter, for
T-29.II.5. You do not see how much you now can give, because of everything you have received. 2
T-29.II.6. Such is the promise of the living God; His Son have life and every living thing be part of
T-29.II.7. The body does not change. 2 It represents the larger dream that change is possible. 3 To
T-29.II.8. Sickness is a demand the body be a thing that it is not. 2 Its nothingness is guarantee that
T-29.II.9. The body that is asked to be a god will be attacked, because its nothingness has not been
T-29.II.10. As "something" is the body asked to be God's enemy, replacing what He is with
T-29.III.1. Condemn your savior not because he thinks he is a body. 2 For beyond his dreams is his
T-29.III.2. Think you the Father lost Himself when He created you? 2 Was He made weak because
T-29.III.3. Within the dream of bodies and of death is yet one theme of truth; no more, perhaps,
T-29.III.4. Make way for love, which you did not create, but which you can extend. 2 On earth this
T-29.III.5. How holy are you, that the Son of God can be your savior in the midst of dreams of
T-29.IV.1. Do you believe that truth can be but some illusions? 2 They are dreams because they are
T-29.IV.2. The dreams you think you like would hold you back as much as those in which the fear
T-29.IV.3. In simplest form, it can be said attack is a response to function unfulfilled as you
T-29.IV.4. When you are angry, is it not because someone has failed to fill the function you allotted
T-29.IV.5. How happy would your dreams become if you were not the one who gave the "proper"
T-29.IV.6. What is your brother for? 2 You do not know, because your function is obscure to you. 3
T-29.V.1. There is a place in you where this whole world has been forgotten; where no memory of
T-29.V.2. Think not that you can change Their dwelling place. 2 For your Identity abides in Them,
T-29.V.3. Here is the role the Holy Spirit gives to you who wait upon the Son of God, and would
T-29.V.4. This sacred Son of God is like yourself; the mirror of his Father's Love for you, the soft
T-29.V.5. There is no gift the Father asks of you but that you see in all creation but the shining
T-29.V.6. If you but knew the glorious goal that lies beyond forgiveness, you would not keep hold
T-29.V.7. A dream is given you in which he is your savior, not your enemy in hate. 2 A dream is
T-29.V.8. Such is the core of fear in every dream that has been kept apart from use by Him Who
T-29.VI.1. How willing are you to forgive your brother? 2 How much do you desire peace instead
T-29.VI.2. Swear not to die, you holy Son of God! 2 You make a bargain that you cannot keep. 3
T-29.VI.3. Nothing survives its purpose. 2 If it be conceived to die, then die it must unless it does
T-29.VI.4. Change is the greatest gift God gave to all that you would make eternal, to ensure that
T-29.VI.5. This world will bind your feet and tie your hands and kill your body only if you think
T-29.VI.6. How lovely is the world whose purpose is forgiveness of God's Son! 2 How free from
T-29.VII.1. Seek not outside yourself. 2 For it will fail, and you will weep each time an idol falls. 3
T-29.VII.2. No one who comes here but must still have hope, some lingering illusion, or some
T-29.VII.3. The lingering illusion will impel him to seek out a thousand idols, and to seek beyond
T-29.VII.4. Whenever you attempt to reach a goal in which the body's betterment is cast as major
T-29.VII.5. Idols must fall because they have no life, and what is lifeless is a sign of death. 2 You
T-29.VII.6. All idols of this world were made to keep the truth within from being known to you,
T-29.VII.7. Let us forget the purpose of the world the past has given it. 2 For otherwise, the future
T-29.VII.8. To change all this, and open up a road of hope and of release in what appeared to be an
T-29.VII.9. Yet where are dreams but in a mind asleep? 2 And can a dream succeed in making real
T-29.VII.10. It is not so. 2 Salvation seeks to prove there is no death, and only life exists. 3 The
T-29.VIII.1. What is an idol? 2 Do you think you know? 3 For idols are unrecognized as such, and
T-29.VIII.2. Let not their form deceive you. 2 Idols are but substitutes for your reality. 3 In some
T-29.VIII.3. An idol is a false impression, or a false belief; some form of anti-Christ, that
T-29.VIII.4. This world of idols is a veil across the face of Christ, because its purpose is to separate
T-29.VIII.5. What is an idol? 2 Nothing! 3 It must be believed before it seems to come to life, and
T-29.VIII.6. An idol is established by belief, and when it is withdrawn the idol "dies." 2 This is the
T-29.VIII.7. Where is an idol? 2 Nowhere! 3 Can there be a gap in what is infinite, a place where
T-29.VIII.8. What purpose has an idol, then? 2 What is it for? 3 This is the only question that has
T-29.VIII.9. God has not many Sons, but only One. 2 Who can have more, and who be given less?
T-29.IX.1. The slave of idols is a willing slave. 2 For willing he must be to let himself bow down in
T-29.IX.2. A dream of judgment came into the mind that God created perfect as Himself. 2 And in
T-29.IX.3. All figures in the dream are idols, made to save you from the dream. 2 Yet they are part
T-29.IX.4. There can be no salvation in the dream as you are dreaming it. 2 For idols must be part
T-29.IX.5. Nightmares are childish dreams. 2 The toys have turned against the child who thought he
T-29.IX.6. There is a time when childhood should be passed and gone forever. 2 Seek not to retain
T-29.IX.7. The real world still is but a dream. 2 Except the figures have been changed. 3 They are
T-29.IX.8. Forgiving dreams have little need to last. 2 They are not made to separate the mind from
T-29.IX.9. Whenever you feel fear in any form,--and you are fearful if you do not feel a deep
T-29.IX.10. Forgiving dreams remind you that you live in safety and have not attacked yourself. 2
T-30.in.1. The new beginning now becomes the focus of the curriculum. 2 The goal is clear, but
T-30.I.1. Decisions are continuous. 2 You do not always know when you are making them. 3 But
T-30.I.2. (1) The outlook starts with this: 2 Today I will make no decisions by myself. 3 This means
T-30.I.3. This is your major problem now. 2 You still make up your mind, and then decide to ask
T-30.I.4. (2) Throughout the day, at any time you think of it and have a quiet moment for reflection,
T-30.I.5. But there will still be times when you have judged already. 2 Now the answer will
T-30.I.6. (3) Remember once again the day you want, and recognize that something has occurred
T-30.I.7. Try to observe this rule without delay, despite your opposition. 2 For you have already
T-30.I.8. (4) If you are so unwilling to receive you cannot even let your question go, you can begin
T-30.I.9. (5) Having decided that you do not like the way you feel, what could be easier than to
T-30.I.10. Now you have reached the turning point, because it has occurred to you that you will gain
T-30.I.11. (6) This tiny grain of wisdom will suffice to take you further. 2 You are not coerced, but
T-30.I.12. (7) This final step is but acknowledgment of lack of opposition to be helped. 2 It is a
T-30.I.13. It must be clear that it is easier to have a happy day if you prevent unhappiness from
T-30.I.14. We said you can begin a happy day with the determination not to make decisions by
T-30.I.15. Your day is not at random. 2 It is set by what you choose to live it with, and how the
T-30.I.16. The second rule as well is but a fact. 2 For you and your adviser must agree on what you
T-30.I.17. It needs but two who would have happiness this day to promise it to all the world. 2 It
T-30.II.1. Do you not understand that to oppose the Holy Spirit is to fight yourself? 2 He tells you
T-30.II.2. How wonderful it is to do your will! 2 For that is freedom. 3 There is nothing else that
T-30.II.3. Look once again upon your enemy, the one you chose to hate instead of love. 2 For thus
T-30.II.4. What cause have you for anger in a world that merely waits your blessing to be free? 2 If
T-30.II.5. God turns to you to ask the world be saved, for by your own salvation is it healed. 2 And
T-30.III.1. Idols are quite specific. 2 But your will is universal, being limitless. 3 And so it has no
T-30.III.2. It is not form you seek. 2 What form can be a substitute for God the Father's Love? 3
T-30.III.3. Behind the search for every idol lies the yearning for completion. 2 Wholeness has no
T-30.III.4. It never is the idol that you want. 2 But what you think it offers you, you want indeed
T-30.III.5. Completion is the function of God's Son. 2 He has no need to seek for it at all. 3 Beyond
T-30.III.6. Nothing that God knows not exists. 2 And what He knows exists forever, changelessly. 3
T-30.III.7. Thoughts seem to come and go. 2 Yet all this means is that you are sometimes aware of
T-30.III.8. The Thoughts of God are far beyond all change, and shine forever. 2 They await not
T-30.III.9. Who knows the Father knows this light, for He is the eternal sky that holds it safe,
T-30.III.10. Beyond all idols is the Thought God holds of you. 2 Completely unaffected by the
T-30.III.11. Where could the Thought God holds of you exist but where you are? 2 Is your reality a
T-30.IV.1. You will attack what does not satisfy, and thus you will not see you made it up. 2 You
T-30.IV.2. The wearying, dissatisfying gods you made are blown-up children's toys. 2 A child is
T-30.IV.3. The gap that is not there is filled with toys in countless forms. 2 And each one seems to
T-30.IV.4. Reality observes the laws of God, and not the rules you set. 2 It is His laws that
T-30.IV.5. Appearances deceive because they are appearances and not reality. 2 Dwell not on them
T-30.IV.6. Appearances can but deceive the mind that wants to be deceived. 2 And you can make a
T-30.IV.7. Salvation is a paradox indeed! 2 What could it be except a happy dream? 3 It asks you
T-30.IV.8. Here does the dream of separation start to fade and disappear. 2 For here the gap that is
T-30.V.1. The real world is the state of mind in which the only purpose of the world is seen to be
T-30.V.2. Here, it is thought that understanding is acquired by attack. 2 There, it is clear that by
T-30.V.3. Not yet is Heaven quite remembered, for the purpose of forgiveness still remains. 2 Yet
T-30.V.4. The final step is God's, because it is but God Who could create a perfect Son and share
T-30.V.5. The real world still falls short of this, for this is God's Own purpose; only His, and yet
T-30.V.6. Thus is the real world's purpose gently brought into awareness, to replace the goal of sin
T-30.V.7. When brothers join in purpose in the world of fear, they stand already at the edge of the
T-30.V.8. How light and easy is the step across the narrow boundaries of the world of fear when
T-30.V.9. An ancient hate is passing from the world. 2 And with it goes all hatred and all fear. 3
T-30.V.10. Do not look back except in honesty. 2 And when an idol tempts you, think of this: 3
T-30.V.11. The Will of God forever lies in those whose hands are joined. 2 Until they joined, they
T-30.VI.1. Anger is never justified. 2 Attack has no foundation. 3 It is here escape from fear begins,
T-30.VI.2. Pardon is always justified. 2 It has a sure foundation. 3 You do not forgive the
T-30.VI.3. This understanding is the only change that lets the real world rise to take the place of
T-30.VI.4. This is the false forgiveness which the world employs to keep the sense of sin alive. 2
T-30.VI.5. Forgiveness recognized as merited will heal. 2 It gives the miracle its strength to
T-30.VI.6. There is no surer proof idolatry is what you wish than a belief there are some forms of
T-30.VI.7. It must be true the miracle can heal all forms of sickness, or it cannot heal. 2 Its purpose
T-30.VI.8. Look on your brother with the willingness to see him as he is. 2 And do not keep a part
T-30.VI.9. God's Son is perfect, or he cannot be God's Son. 2 Nor will you know him, if you think
T-30.VI.10. Look on your brother with this hope in you, and you will understand he could not make
T-30.VII.1. Would God have left the meaning of the world to your interpretation? 2 If He had, it
T-30.VII.2. What do your scripts reflect except your plans for what the day should be? 2 And thus
T-30.VII.3. Only a constant purpose can endow events with stable meaning. 2 But it must accord
T-30.VII.4. A common purpose is the only means whereby perception can be stabilized, and one
T-30.VII.5. Escape from judgment simply lies in this; all things have but one purpose, which you
T-30.VII.6. How can communication really be established while the symbols that are used mean
T-30.VII.7. Do not interpret out of solitude, for what you see means nothing. 2 It will shift in what
T-30.VIII.1. Appearances deceive, but can be changed. 2 Reality is changeless. 3 It does not deceive
T-30.VIII.2. The miracle is means to demonstrate that all appearances can change because they are
T-30.VIII.3. What is temptation but a wish to make illusions real? 2 It does not seem to be the wish
T-30.VIII.4. Reality is changeless. 2 Miracles but show what you have interposed between reality
T-30.VIII.5. Because reality is changeless is a miracle already there to heal all things that change,
T-30.VIII.6. This will you look upon when you decide there is not one appearance you would hold
T-31.I.1. How simple is salvation! 2 All it says is what was never true is not true now, and never
T-31.I.2. There is a reason. 2 But confuse it not with difficulty in the simple things salvation asks
T-31.I.3. No one who understands what you have learned, how carefully you learned it, and the
T-31.I.4. Who could maintain that lessons such as these are easy? 2 Yet you have learned more than
T-31.I.5. Learning is an ability you made and gave yourself. 2 It was not made to do the Will of
T-31.I.6. Is this a little Voice, so small and still It cannot rise above the senseless noise of sounds
T-31.I.7. The lessons to be learned are only two. 2 Each has its outcome in a different world. 3 And
T-31.I.8. The outcome of the lesson that God's Son is guiltless is a world in which there is no fear,
T-31.I.9. There is no living thing that does not share the universal Will that it be whole, and that you
T-31.I.10. The fear of God results as surely from the lesson that His Son is guilty as God's Love
T-31.I.11. What is temptation but a wish to make the wrong decision on what you would learn, and
T-31.I.12. Let us be still an instant, and forget all things we ever learned, all thoughts we had, and
T-31.I.13. Be innocent of judgment, unaware of any thoughts of evil or of good that ever crossed
T-31.II.1. An ancient lesson is not overcome by the opposing of the new and old. 2 It is not
T-31.II.2. Let us review again what seems to stand between you and the truth of what you are. 2 For
T-31.II.3. What you would choose between is not a choice and gives but the illusion it is free, for it
T-31.II.4. Perhaps you call it love. 2 Perhaps you think that it is murder justified at last. 3 You hate
T-31.II.5. And what of him? 2 What does he want of you? 3 What could he want, but what you
T-31.II.6. Before you answer, pause to think of this: 2 The answer that I give my brother is what I
T-31.II.7. Because he is your equal in God's Love, you will be saved from all appearances and
T-31.II.8. Be very still an instant. 2 Come without all thought of what you ever learned before, and
T-31.II.9. Forgive your brother all appearances, that are but ancient lessons you have taught yourself
T-31.II.10. An instant spent without your old ideas of who your great companion is and what he
T-31.II.11. Together is your joint inheritance remembered and accepted by you both. 2 Alone it is
T-31.III.1. Only the self-accused condemn. 2 As you prepare to make a choice that will result in
T-31.III.2. Why should his sins be sins, if you did not believe they could not be forgiven in you? 2
T-31.III.3. Sins are in bodies. 2 They are not perceived in minds. 3 They are not seen as purposes,
T-31.III.4. Yet is the body prisoner, and not the mind. 2 The body thinks no thoughts. 3 It has no
T-31.III.5. The mind that thinks it is a sin has but one purpose; that the body be the source of sin, to
T-31.III.6. Let us be glad that you will see what you believe, and that it has been given you to
T-31.III.7. The innocent release in gratitude for their release. 2 And what they see upholds their
T-31.IV.1. There is a tendency to think the world can offer consolation and escape from problems
T-31.IV.2. Real choice is no illusion. 2 But the world has none to offer. 3 All its roads but lead to
T-31.IV.3. There is no choice where every end is sure. 2 Perhaps you would prefer to try them all,
T-31.IV.4. Why would you seek to try another road, another person or another place, when you have
T-31.IV.5. Who would be willing to be turned away from all the roadways of the world, unless he
T-31.IV.6. The learning that the world can offer but one choice, no matter what its form may be, is
T-31.IV.7. Think not that happiness is ever found by following a road away from it. 2 This makes
T-31.IV.8. There is a choice that you have power to make when you have seen the real alternatives.
T-31.IV.9. He has not left His Thoughts! 2 But you forgot His Presence and remembered not His
T-31.IV.10. He has not left His Thoughts! 2 He could no more depart from them than they could
T-31.IV.11. Forgive yourself your madness, and forget all senseless journeys and all goal-less aims.
T-31.V.1. The learning of the world is built upon a concept of the self adjusted to the world's
T-31.V.2. A concept of the self is made by you. 2 It bears no likeness to yourself at all. 3 It is an
T-31.V.3. This aspect can grow angry, for the world is wicked and unable to provide the love and
T-31.V.4. The face of innocence the concept of the self so proudly wears can tolerate attack in self-defense, for is it not a well-known fact the world deals harshly with defenseless innocence? 2 No
T-31.V.5. Beneath the face of innocence there is a lesson that the concept of the self was made to
T-31.V.6. Here is the central lesson that ensures your brother is condemned eternally. 2 For what
T-31.V.7. Concepts are learned. 2 They are not natural. 3 Apart from learning they do not exist. 4
T-31.V.8. A concept of the self is meaningless, for no one here can see what it is for, and therefore
T-31.V.9. Thus are the Holy Spirit's lesson plans arranged in easy steps, that though there be some
T-31.V.10. That you are what your brother made of you seems most unlikely. 2 Even if he did, who
T-31.V.11. Perhaps the reason why this concept must be kept in darkness is that, in the light, the
T-31.V.12. There are alternatives about the thing that you must be. 2 You might, for instance, be the
T-31.V.13. Although this step has gains, it does not yet approach a basic question. 2 Something
T-31.V.14. The concept of the self has always been the great preoccupation of the world. 2 And
T-31.V.15. Seek not your Self in symbols. 2 There can be no concept that can stand for what you
T-31.V.16. You will make many concepts of the self as learning goes along. 2 Each one will show
T-31.V.17. The world can teach no images of you unless you want to learn them. 2 There will come
T-31.VI.1. You see the flesh or recognize the spirit. 2 There is no compromise between the two. 3 If
T-31.VI.2. Salvation is undoing. 2 If you choose to see the body, you behold a world of separation,
T-31.VI.3. Salvation does not ask that you behold the spirit and perceive the body not. 2 It merely
T-31.VI.4. Only in arrogance could you conceive that you must make the way to Heaven plain. 2
T-31.VI.5. You who believe that you can choose to see the Son of God as you would have him be,
T-31.VI.6. Are you invulnerable? 2 Then the world is harmless in your sight. 3 Do you forgive? 4
T-31.VI.7. Your will be done, you holy child of God. 2 It does not matter if you think you are in
T-31.VII.1. Learning is change. 2 Salvation does not seek to use a means as yet too alien to your
T-31.VII.2. You could not recognize your "evil" thoughts as long as you see value in attack. 2 You
T-31.VII.3. In terms of concepts, it is thus you see him more than just a body, for the good is never
T-31.VII.4. You live in that world just as much as this. 2 For both are concepts of yourself, which
T-31.VII.5. Have faith in him who walks with you, so that your fearful concept of yourself may
T-31.VII.6. The concept of yourself that now you hold would guarantee your function here remain
T-31.VII.7. The concept of the self stands like a shield, a silent barricade before the truth, and hides
T-31.VII.8. Behold your role within the universe! 2 To every part of true creation has the Lord of
T-31.VII.9. The veil across the face of Christ, the fear of God and of salvation, and the love of guilt
T-31.VII.10. What is temptation but the wish to stay in hell and misery? 2 And what could this give
T-31.VII.11. Yet while you wish to stay in hell, how could you be the savior of the Son of God? 2
T-31.VII.12. Whatever form temptation seems to take, it always but reflects a wish to be a self that
T-31.VII.13. The savior's vision is as innocent of what your brother is as it is free of any judgment
T-31.VII.14. Be vigilant against temptation, then, remembering that it is but a wish, insane and
T-31.VII.15. Let not the world's light, given unto you, be hidden from the world. 2 It needs the
T-31.VIII.1. Temptation has one lesson it would teach, in all its forms, wherever it occurs. 2 It
T-31.VIII.2. How do you make the choice? 2 How easily is this explained! 3 You always choose
T-31.VIII.3. Trials are but lessons that you failed to learn presented once again, so where you made
T-31.VIII.4. The images you make cannot prevail against what God Himself would have you be. 2
T-31.VIII.5. Learn, then, the happy habit of response to all temptation to perceive yourself as weak
T-31.VIII.6. You are as God created you, and so is every living thing you look upon, regardless of
T-31.VIII.7. Deny me not the little gift I ask, when in exchange I lay before your feet the peace of
T-31.VIII.8. My brothers in salvation, do not fail to hear my voice and listen to my words. 2 I ask
T-31.VIII.9. Let us be glad that we can walk the world, and find so many chances to perceive
T-31.VIII.10. I thank You, Father, for these holy ones who are my brothers as they are Your Sons. 2
T-31.VIII.11. In joyous welcome is my hand outstretched to every brother who would join with me
T-31.VIII.12. And now we say "Amen." 2 For Christ has come to dwell in the abode You set for
W-in.1. A theoretical foundation such as the text provides is necessary as a framework to make the
W-in.2. The exercises are very simple. 2 They do not require a great deal of time, and it does not
W-in.3. The workbook is divided into two main sections, the first dealing with the undoing of the
W-in.4. The purpose of the workbook is to train your mind in a systematic way to a different
W-in.5. Transfer of training in true perception does not proceed as does transfer of the training of
W-in.6. The only general rules to be observed throughout, then, are: First, that the exercises be
W-in.7. The overall aim of the exercises is to increase your ability to extend the ideas you will be
W-in.8. Some of the ideas the workbook presents you will find hard to believe, and others may
W-in.9. Remember only this; you need not believe the ideas, you need not accept them, and you
W-1.1. Now look slowly around you, and practice applying this idea very specifically to whatever
W-1.2. Then look farther away from your immediate area, and apply the idea to a wider range:
W-1.3. Notice that these statements are not arranged in any order, and make no allowance for
W-1.4. Each of the first three lessons should not be done more than twice a day each, preferably
W-2.1. The exercises with this idea are the same as those for the first one. 2 Begin with the things
W-2.2. Merely glance easily and fairly quickly around you, trying to avoid selection by size,
W-3.1. Apply this idea in the same way as the previous ones, without making distinctions of any
W-3.2. The point of the exercises is to help you clear your mind of all past associations, to see
W-4.1. Unlike the preceding ones, these exercises do not begin with the idea for the day. 2 In these
W-4.2. In selecting the subjects for the application of today's idea, the usual specificity is required. 2
W-4.3. This is a major exercise, and will be repeated from time to time in somewhat different form.
W-4.4. In using your thoughts for application of the idea for today, identify each thought by the
W-4.5. You can also use the idea for a particular thought that you recognize as harmful. 2 This
W-4.6. Further, since these exercises are the first of their kind, you may find the suspension of
W-5.1. This idea, like the preceding one, can be used with any person, situation or event you think
W-5.2. When using the idea for today for a specific perceived cause of an upset in any form, use
W-5.3. But again, this should not be substituted for practice periods in which you first search your
W-5.4. In these exercises, more than in the preceding ones, you may find it hard to be
W-5.5. Then examine your mind for whatever is distressing you, regardless of how much or how
W-5.6. You may also find yourself less willing to apply today's idea to some perceived sources of
W-5.7. Then search your mind for no more than a minute or so, and try to identify a number of
W-6.1. The exercises with this idea are very similar to the preceding ones. 2 Again, it is necessary
W-6.2. Today's idea is useful for application to anything that seems to upset you, and can profitably
W-6.3. Again, if you resist applying the idea to some upsetting thoughts more than to others, remind
W-7.1. This idea is particularly difficult to believe at first. 2 Yet it is the rationale for all of the
W-7.2. Old ideas about time are very difficult to change, because everything you believe is rooted in
W-7.3. Look at a cup, for example. 2 Do you see a cup, or are you merely reviewing your past
W-7.4. Look about you. 2 This is equally true of whatever you look at. 3 Acknowledge this by
W-7.5. Do not linger over any one thing in particular, but remember to omit nothing specifically. 2
W-8.1. This idea is, of course, the reason why you see only the past. 2 No one really sees anything.
W-8.2. The one wholly true thought one can hold about the past is that it is not here. 2 To think
W-8.3. The purpose of the exercises for today is to begin to train your mind to recognize when it is
W-8.4. The exercises for today should be done with eyes closed. 2 This is because you actually
W-8.5. Then name each of your thoughts specifically, for example:
W-8.6. This can be done four or five times during the day, unless you find it irritates you. 2 If you
W-9.1. This idea obviously follows from the two preceding ones. 2 But while you may be able to
W-9.2. It is difficult for the untrained mind to believe that what it seems to picture is not there. 2
W-9.3. These exercises, for which three or four practice periods are sufficient, involve looking
W-9.4. Begin with things that are nearest you, and then extend the range outward:
W-9.5. It is emphasized again that while complete inclusion should not be attempted, specific
W-10.1. This idea applies to all the thoughts of which you are aware, or become aware in the
W-10.2. This is the second time we have used this kind of idea. 2 The form is only slightly
W-10.3. This aspect of the correction process began with the idea that the thoughts of which you are
W-10.4. Close your eyes for these exercises, and introduce them by repeating the idea for today
W-10.5. Today's thought can obviously serve for any thought that distresses you at any time. 2 In
W-11.1. This is the first idea we have had that is related to a major phase of the correction process;
W-11.2. The practice periods for today's idea are to be undertaken somewhat differently from the
W-11.3. To do these exercises for maximum benefit, the eyes should move from one thing to
W-11.4. Three practice periods today will probably be sufficient. 2 However, if there is little or no
W-12.1. The importance of this idea lies in the fact that it contains a correction for a major
W-12.2. These exercises are done with eyes open. 2 Look around you, this time quite slowly. 3 Try
W-12.3. As you look about you, say to yourself:
W-12.4. Be sure that you do not alter the time intervals between applying today's idea to what you
W-12.5. What is meaningless is neither good nor bad. 2 Why, then, should a meaningless world
W-12.6. Three or four times is enough for practicing the idea for today. 2 Nor should the practice
W-13.1. Today's idea is really another form of the preceding one, except that it is more specific as
W-13.2. Recognition of meaninglessness arouses intense anxiety in all the separated ones. 2 It
W-13.3. It is essential, therefore, that you learn to recognize the meaningless, and accept it without
W-13.4. The exercises for today, which should be done about three or four times for not more than
W-13.5. You may find it difficult to avoid resistance, in one form or another, to this concluding
W-13.6. This is our first attempt at stating an explicit cause and effect relationship of a kind which
W-14.1. The idea for today is, of course, the reason why a meaningless world is impossible. 2 What
W-14.2. The exercises for today are to be practiced with eyes closed throughout. 2 The mind-searching period should be short, a minute at most. 3 Do not have more than three practice periods
W-14.3. The idea for today is another step in learning to let go the thoughts that you have written on
W-14.4. With eyes closed, think of all the horrors in the world that cross your mind. 2 Name each
W-14.5. Suitable subjects for the application of today's idea also include anything you are afraid
W-14.6. This is your personal repertory of horrors at which you are looking. 2 These things are part
W-14.7. The idea for today can, of course, be applied to anything that disturbs you during the day,
W-15.1. It is because the thoughts you think you think appear as images that you do not recognize
W-15.2. This introductory idea to the process of image making that you call seeing will not have
W-15.3. As we go along, you may have many "light episodes." 2 They may take many different
W-15.4. In practicing the idea for today, repeat it first to yourself, and then apply it to whatever you
W-15.5. Although you will obviously not be able to apply the idea to very many things during the
W-16.1. The idea for today is a beginning step in dispelling the belief that your thoughts have no
W-16.2. There is no more self-contradictory concept than that of "idle thoughts." 2 What gives rise
W-16.3. Besides your recognizing that thoughts are never idle, salvation requires that you also
W-16.4. In applying the idea for today, search your mind for a minute or so with eyes closed, and
W-16.5. In the practice periods, first repeat the idea to yourself, and then as each one crosses your
W-16.6. Four or five practice periods are recommended, if you find them relatively effortless. 2 If
W-17.1. This idea is another step in the direction of identifying cause and effect as it really operates
W-17.2. In applying today's idea, say to yourself, with eyes open:
W-17.3. As usual, it is essential to make no distinctions between what you believe to be animate or
W-17.4. Three or four specific practice periods are recommended, and no less than three are
W-18.1. The idea for today is another step in learning that the thoughts which give rise to what you
W-18.2. Today's idea does not refer to what you see as much as to how you see it. 2 Therefore, the
W-18.3. Look about you, selecting subjects for the application of the idea for today as randomly as
W-19.1. The idea for today is obviously the reason why your seeing does not affect you alone. 2
W-19.2. Today we are again emphasizing the fact that minds are joined. 2 This is rarely a wholly
W-19.3. The minute or so of mind searching which today's exercises require is to be undertaken
W-19.4. The requirement of as much indiscriminateness as possible in selecting subjects for the
W-19.5. Apart from the "as needed" application of today's idea, at least three practice periods are
W-20.1. We have been quite casual about our practice periods thus far. 2 There has been virtually
W-20.2. This is our first attempt to introduce structure. 2 Do not misconstrue it as an effort to exert
W-20.3. Your decision to see is all that vision requires. 2 What you want is yours. 3 Do not mistake
W-20.4. The exercises for today consist in reminding yourself throughout the day that you want to
W-20.5. Repeat today's idea slowly and positively at least twice an hour today, attempting to do so
W-21.1. The idea for today is obviously a continuation and extension of the preceding one. 2 This
W-21.2. In the practice periods, begin by repeating the idea to yourself. 2 Then close your eyes and
W-21.3. Try, therefore, not to let the "little" thoughts of anger escape you in the practice periods. 2
W-21.4. As you search your mind for all the forms in which attack thoughts present themselves,
W-21.5. Try to be as specific as possible. 2 You may, for example, focus your anger on a particular
W-22.1. Today's idea accurately describes the way anyone who holds attack thoughts in his mind
W-22.2. It is from this savage fantasy that you want to escape. 2 Is it not joyous news to hear that it
W-22.3. Look at the world about you at least five times today, for at least a minute each time. 2 As
W-23.1. The idea for today contains the only way out of fear that will ever succeed. 2 Nothing else
W-23.2. If the cause of the world you see is attack thoughts, you must learn that it is these thoughts
W-23.3. The world you see is a vengeful world, and everything in it is a symbol of vengeance. 2
W-23.4. You see the world that you have made, but you do not see yourself as the image maker. 2
W-23.5. The idea for today introduces the thought that you are not trapped in the world you see,
W-23.6. Besides using it throughout the day as the need arises, five practice periods are required in
W-23.7. In the practice periods, be sure to include both your thoughts of attacking and of being
W-24.1. In no situation that arises do you realize the outcome that would make you happy. 2
W-24.2. If you realized that you do not perceive your own best interests, you could be taught what
W-24.3. The exercises for today require much more honesty than you are accustomed to using. 2 A
W-24.4. The practice periods should begin with repeating today's idea, followed by searching the
W-24.5. In applying the idea for today, name each situation that occurs to you, and then enumerate
W-24.6. If these exercises are done properly, you will quickly recognize that you are making a large
W-24.7. After covering the list of as many hoped-for goals as possible, for each unresolved
W-25.1. Purpose is meaning. 2 Today's idea explains why nothing you see means anything. 3 You
W-25.2. You perceive the world and everything in it as meaningful in terms of ego goals. 2 These
W-25.3. Another way of describing the goals you now perceive is to say that they are all concerned
W-25.4. Before you can make any sense out of the exercises for today, one more thought is
W-25.5. It is crucial to your learning to be willing to give up the goals you have established for
W-25.6. Six practice periods, each of two-minutes duration, are required. 2 Each practice period
W-26.1. It is surely obvious that if you can be attacked you are not invulnerable. 2 You see attack as
W-26.2. Because your attack thoughts will be projected, you will fear attack. 2 And if you fear
W-26.3. The idea for today introduces the thought that you always attack yourself first. 2 If attack
W-26.4. Practice with today's idea will help you to understand that vulnerability or invulnerability is
W-26.5. Six practice periods are required in applying today's idea. 2 A full two minutes should be
W-26.6. The practice period should begin with repeating the idea for today, then closing your eyes
W-26.7. First, name the situation:
W-26.8. If you are doing the exercises properly, you should have some five or six distressing
W-26.9. After you have named each outcome of which you are afraid, tell yourself:
W-27.1. Today's idea expresses something stronger than mere determination. 2 It gives vision
W-27.2. There may be a great temptation to believe that some sort of sacrifice is being asked of you
W-27.3. The idea for today needs many repetitions for maximum benefit. 2 It should be used at least
W-27.4. The real question is, how often will you remember? 2 How much do you want today's idea
W-28.1. Today we are really giving specific application to the idea for yesterday. 2 In these practice
W-28.2. You may wonder why it is important to say, for example, "Above all else I want to see this
W-28.3. When you say, "Above all else I want to see this table differently," you are making a
W-28.4. You will not question what you have already defined. 2 And the purpose of these exercises
W-28.5. You could, in fact, gain vision from just that table, if you would withdraw all your own
W-28.6. In using the table as a subject for applying the idea for today, you are therefore really
W-28.7. We will have six two-minute practice periods today, in which the idea for the day is stated
W-28.8. As usual, the applications should include the name of the subject your eyes happen to light
W-29.1. The idea for today explains why you can see all purpose in everything. 2 It explains why
W-29.2. You will probably find this idea very difficult to grasp at this point. 2 You may find it silly,
W-29.3. Try then, today, to begin to learn how to look on all things with love, appreciation and
W-29.4. Our six two-minute practice periods for today should follow a now familiar pattern: Begin
W-29.5. Your list of subjects should therefore be as free of self-selection as possible. 2 For
W-30.1. The idea for today is the springboard for vision. 2 From this idea will the world open up
W-30.2. Today we are trying to use a new kind of "projection." 2 We are not attempting to get rid
W-30.3. Today's idea should be applied as often as possible throughout the day. 2 Whenever you
W-30.4. Real vision is not limited to concepts such as "near" and "far." 2 To help you begin to get
W-30.5. Real vision is not only unlimited by space and distance, but it does not depend on the
W-31.1. Today's idea is the introduction to your declaration of release. 2 Again, the idea should be
W-31.2. Two longer periods of practice with the idea for today are needed, one in the morning and
W-31.3. As you survey your inner world, merely let whatever thoughts cross your mind come into
W-31.4. In addition, repeat the idea for today as often as possible during the day. 2 Remind yourself
W-31.5. The idea for today is also a particularly useful one to use as a response to any form of
W-32.1. Today we are continuing to develop the theme of cause and effect. 2 You are not the victim
W-32.2. The idea for today, like the preceding ones, applies to your inner and outer worlds, which
W-32.3. Again we will begin the practice periods for the morning and evening by repeating the idea
W-32.4. For the two longer practice periods three to five minutes are recommended, with not less
W-32.5. These exercises are also to be continued during the day, as often as possible. 2 The shorter
W-32.6. The idea for today should also be applied immediately to any situation that may distress
W-33.1. Today's idea is an attempt to recognize that you can shift your perception of the world in
W-33.2. Merely glance casually around the world you perceive as outside yourself, then close your
W-33.3. The shorter exercise periods should be as frequent as possible. 2 Specific applications of
W-33.4. Remember to apply today's idea the instant you are aware of distress. 2 It may be necessary
W-34.1. The idea for today begins to describe the conditions that prevail in the other way of seeing.
W-34.2. Three longer practice periods are required for today's exercises. 2 One in the morning and
W-34.3. Some five minutes of mind searching are required for each of the longer practice periods. 2
W-34.4. If you begin to experience difficulty in thinking of specific subjects, continue to repeat the
W-34.5. The shorter applications are to be frequent, and made whenever you feel your peace of
W-34.6. If the inroads on your peace of mind take the form of more generalized adverse emotions,
W-35.1. Today's idea does not describe the way you see yourself now. 2 It does, however, describe
W-35.2. You will believe that you are part of where you think you are. 2 That is because you
W-35.3. The idea for today presents a very different view of yourself. 2 By establishing your
W-35.4. For each of the three five-minute practice periods today, begin by repeating today's idea to
W-35.5. In the earlier part of the mind-searching period, you will probably emphasize what you
W-35.6. A suitable unselected list for applying the idea for today might be as follows:
W-35.7. You should not think of these terms in an abstract way. 2 They will occur to you as various
W-35.8. During the longer exercise periods, there will probably be intervals in which nothing
W-35.9. As often as possible during the day, pick up a specific attribute or attributes you are
W-36.1. Today's idea extends the idea for yesterday from the perceiver to the perceived. 2 You are
W-36.2. Four three-to-five-minute practice periods are required for today. 2 Try to distribute them
W-36.3. First, close your eyes and repeat the idea for today several times, slowly. 2 Then open your
W-36.4. For the shorter exercise periods, close your eyes and repeat the idea; look about you as you
W-37.1. This idea contains the first glimmerings of your true function in the world, or why you are
W-37.2. There is no other way in which the idea of sacrifice can be removed from the world's
W-37.3. Your holiness is the salvation of the world. 2 It lets you teach the world that it is one with
W-37.4. Today's four longer exercise periods, each to involve three to five minutes of practice,
W-37.5. You may continue the practice period with your eyes closed; you may open your eyes
W-37.6. The shorter exercises consist of repeating the idea as often as you can. 2 It is particularly
W-38.1. Your holiness reverses all the laws of the world. 2 It is beyond every restriction of time,
W-38.2. Through your holiness the power of God is made manifest. 2 Through your holiness the
W-38.3. If you are holy, so is everything God created. 2 You are holy because all things He created
W-38.4. In the four longer practice periods, each preferably to last a full five minutes, repeat the
W-38.5. From time to time you may want to vary this procedure, and add some relevant thoughts of
W-38.6. In the frequent shorter applications, apply the idea in its original form unless a specific
W-39.1. If guilt is hell, what is its opposite? 2 Like the text for which this workbook was written,
W-39.2. If guilt is hell, what is its opposite? 2 This is not difficult, surely. 3 The hesitation you may
W-39.3. We have already said that your holiness is the salvation of the world. 2 What about your
W-39.4. Your holiness is the answer to every question that was ever asked, is being asked now, or
W-39.5. A full five minutes are urged for the four longer practice periods for today, and longer and
W-39.6. Begin the practice periods as usual, by repeating today's idea to yourself. 2 Then, with
W-39.7. Specific situations, events or personalities you associate with unloving thoughts of any kind
W-39.8. Slowly, without conscious selection and without undue emphasis on any one in particular,
W-39.9. You may find these practice periods easier if you intersperse them with several short
W-39.10. Meanwhile, you should feel free to introduce variety into the exercise periods in whatever
W-39.11. In the shorter applications, which should be made some three or four times an hour and
W-40.1. Today we will begin to assert some of the happy things to which you are entitled, being
W-40.2. You need not close your eyes for the exercise periods, although you will probably find it
W-40.3. Today's exercises take little time and no effort. 2 Repeat the idea for today, and then add
W-41.1. Today's idea will eventually overcome completely the sense of loneliness and abandonment
W-41.2. The separated ones have invented many "cures" for what they believe to be "the ills of the
W-41.3. Deep within you is everything that is perfect, ready to radiate through you and out into the
W-41.4. You can never be deprived of your perfect holiness because its Source goes with you
W-41.5. We understand that you do not believe all this. 2 How could you, when the truth is hidden
W-41.6. There will be only one long practice period today. 2 In the morning, as soon as you get up
W-41.7. From time to time, you may repeat the idea if you find it helpful. 2 But most of all, try to
W-41.8. It is quite possible to reach God. 2 In fact it is very easy, because it is the most natural
W-41.9. Throughout the day use today's idea often, repeating it very slowly, preferably with eyes
W-41.10. You can indeed afford to laugh at fear thoughts, remembering that God goes with you
W-42.1. The idea for today combines two very powerful thoughts, both of major importance. 2 It
W-42.2. God is indeed your strength, and what He gives is truly given. 2 This means that you can
W-42.3. We will have two three-to-five-minute practice periods today, one as soon as possible after
W-42.4. Begin these practice periods by repeating the idea for today slowly, with your eyes open,
W-42.5. Any thought that is clearly related to the idea for today is suitable. 2 You may, in fact, be
W-42.6. Remember, however, that active searching for relevant thoughts is not appropriate for
W-42.7. There is no limit on the number of short practice periods that would be beneficial today. 2
W-42.8. The more often you repeat the idea during the day, the more often you will be reminding
W-43.1. Perception is not an attribute of God. 2 His is the realm of knowledge. 3 Yet He has
W-43.2. In God you cannot see. 2 Perception has no function in God, and does not exist. 3 Yet in
W-43.3. You cannot see apart from God because you cannot be apart from God. 2 Whatever you do
W-43.4. Three five-minute practice periods are required today, one as early and one as late as
W-43.5. Although this part of the exercise period should be relatively short, be sure that you select
W-43.6. If you find your mind wandering; if you begin to be aware of thoughts which are clearly
W-43.7. In applying today's idea in the shorter practice periods, the form may vary according to the
W-43.8. Today's idea should also be applied throughout the day to various situations and events that
W-43.9. If no particular subject presents itself to your awareness at the time, merely repeat the idea
W-44.1. Today we are continuing the idea for yesterday, adding another dimension to it. 2 You
W-44.2. In order to see, you must recognize that light is within, not without. 2 You do not see
W-44.3. Today we are going to attempt to reach that light. 2 For this purpose, we will use a form of
W-44.4. Have at least three practice periods today, each lasting three to five minutes. 2 A longer
W-44.5. Your mind is no longer wholly untrained. 2 You are quite ready to learn the form of
W-44.6. If you can stand aside from the ego by ever so little, you will have no difficulty in
W-44.7. Begin the practice period by repeating today's idea with your eyes open, and close them
W-44.8. While no particular approach is advocated for this form of exercise, what is needful is a
W-44.9. If resistance rises in any form, pause long enough to repeat today's idea, keeping your eyes
W-44.10. If you are doing the exercises correctly, you should experience some sense of relaxation,
W-44.11. Throughout the day repeat the idea often, with eyes open or closed as seems better to you
W-45.1. Today's idea holds the key to what your real thoughts are. 2 They are nothing that you think
W-45.2. You think with the Mind of God. 2 Therefore you share your thoughts with Him, as He
W-45.3. Where, then, are your real thoughts? 2 Today we will attempt to reach them. 3 We will
W-45.4. Our three five-minute practice periods for today will take the same general form that we
W-45.5. We will also try to understand that only what God would have us do is what we want to do.
W-45.6. Begin the exercises for today by repeating the idea to yourself, closing your eyes as you do
W-45.7. Under all the senseless thoughts and mad ideas with which you have cluttered up your
W-45.8. It is this Foundation toward which the exercises for today are directed. 2 Here is your mind
W-45.9. In the shorter exercise periods for today, try to remember how important it is to you to
W-46.1. God does not forgive because He has never condemned. 2 And there must be
W-46.2. Yet although God does not forgive, His Love is nevertheless the basis of forgiveness. 2
W-46.3. Today's exercises require at least three full five-minute practice periods, and as many
W-46.4. If you are doing the exercises well you should have no difficulty in finding a number of
W-46.5. The purpose of the first phase of today's practice periods is to put you in a position to
W-46.6. The form of the application may vary considerably, but the central idea should not be lost
W-46.7. The shorter practice periods may consist either of a repetition of the idea for today in the
W-47.1. If you are trusting in your own strength, you have every reason to be apprehensive, anxious
W-47.2. Of yourself you can do none of these things. 2 To believe that you can is to put your trust
W-47.3. God is your safety in every circumstance. 2 His Voice speaks for Him in all situations and
W-47.4. Today we will try to reach past your own weakness to the Source of real strength. 2 Four
W-47.5. Now try to slip past all concerns related to your own sense of inadequacy. 2 It is obvious
W-47.6. The recognition of your own frailty is a necessary step in the correction of your errors, but
W-47.7. In the latter phase of the practice period, try to reach down into your mind to a place of real
W-47.8. During the day, repeat the idea often. 2 Use it as your answer to any disturbance. 3
W-48.1. The idea for today simply states a fact. 2 It is not a fact to those who believe in illusions,
W-48.2. Today's practice periods will be very short, very simple and very frequent. 2 Merely repeat
W-48.3. The presence of fear is a sure sign that you are trusting in your own strength. 2 The
W-49.1. It is quite possible to listen to God's Voice all through the day without interrupting your
W-49.2. The part that is listening to the Voice for God is calm, always at rest and wholly certain. 2
W-49.3. We will need at least four five-minute practice periods today, and more if possible. 2 We
W-49.4. Listen in deep silence. 2 Be very still and open your mind. 3 Go past all the raucous shrieks
W-49.5. Do not forget to repeat today's idea very frequently. 2 Do so with your eyes open when
W-50.1. Here is the answer to every problem that will confront you, today and tomorrow and
W-50.2. All these things are your replacements for the Love of God. 2 All these things are
W-50.3. Only the Love of God will protect you in all circumstances. 2 It will lift you out of every
W-50.4. Put not your faith in illusions. 2 They will fail you. 3 Put all your faith in the Love of God
W-50.5. For ten minutes, twice today, morning and evening, let the idea for today sink deep into
W-rI.in.1. Beginning with today we will have a series of review periods. 2 Each of them will cover
W-rI.in.2. Begin the day by reading the five ideas, with the comments included. 2 Thereafter, it is
W-rI.in.3. It is not necessary to cover the comments that follow each idea either literally or
W-rI.in.4. This is emphasized for practice periods at your stage of learning. 2 It will be necessary,
W-rI.in.5. You will yet learn that peace is part of you, and requires only that you be there to
W-rI.in.6. You will note that, for review purposes, some of the ideas are not given in quite their
W-51.1. (1) Nothing I see means anything.
W-51.2. (2) I have given what I see all the meaning it has for me.
W-51.3. (3) I do not understand anything I see.
W-51.4. (4) These thoughts do not mean anything.
W-51.5. (5) I am never upset for the reason I think.
W-52.1. (6) I am upset because I see what is not there.
W-52.2. (7) I see only the past.
W-52.3. (8) My mind is preoccupied with past thoughts.
W-52.4. (9) I see nothing as it is now.
W-52.5. (10) My thoughts do not mean anything.
W-53.1. (11) My meaningless thoughts are showing me a meaningless world.
W-53.2. (12) I am upset because I see a meaningless world.
W-53.3. (13) A meaningless world engenders fear.
W-53.4. (14) God did not create a meaningless world.
W-53.5. (15) My thoughts are images that I have made.
W-54.1. (16) I have no neutral thoughts.
W-54.2. (17) I see no neutral things.
W-54.3. (18) I am not alone in experiencing the effects of my seeing.
W-54.4. (19) I am not alone in experiencing the effects of my thoughts.
W-54.5. (20) I am determined to see.
W-55.1. (21) I am determined to see things differently.
W-55.2. (22) What I see is a form of vengeance.
W-55.3. (23) I can escape from this world by giving up attack thoughts.
W-55.4. (24) I do not perceive my own best interests.
W-55.5. (25) I do not know what anything is for.
W-56.1. (26) My attack thoughts are attacking my invulnerability.
W-56.2. (27) Above all else I want to see.
W-56.3. (28) Above all else I want to see differently.
W-56.4. (29) God is in everything I see.
W-56.5. (30) God is in everything I see because God is in my mind.
W-57.1. (31) I am not the victim of the world I see.
W-57.2. (32) I have invented the world I see.
W-57.3. (33) There is another way of looking at the world.
W-57.4. (34) I could see peace instead of this.
W-57.5. (35) My mind is part of God's. 2 I am very holy.
W-58.1. (36) My holiness envelops everything I see.
W-58.2. (37) My holiness blesses the world.
W-58.3. (38) There is nothing my holiness cannot do.
W-58.4. (39) My holiness is my salvation. 2 Since my holiness saves me from all guilt, recognizing
W-58.5. (40) I am blessed as a Son of God.
W-59.1. (41) God goes with me wherever I go.
W-59.2. (42) God is my strength. 2 Vision is His gift.
W-59.3. (43) God is my Source. 2 I cannot see apart from Him.
W-59.4. (44) God is the light in which I see.
W-59.5. (45) God is the Mind with which I think.
W-60.1. (46) God is the Love in which I forgive.
W-60.2. (47) God is the strength in which I trust.
W-60.3. (48) There is nothing to fear.
W-60.4. (49) God's Voice speaks to me all through the day.
W-60.5. (50) I am sustained by the Love of God.
W-61.1. Who is the light of the world except God's Son? 2 This, then, is merely a statement of the
W-61.2. To the ego, today's idea is the epitome of self-glorification. 2 But the ego does not
W-61.3. True humility requires that you accept today's idea because it is God's Voice which tells
W-61.4. You will want to think about this idea as often as possible today. 2 It is the perfect answer
W-61.5. As many practice periods as possible should be undertaken today, although each one need
W-61.6. Be sure both to begin and end the day with a practice period. 2 Thus you will awaken with
W-61.7. Today's idea goes far beyond the ego's petty views of what you are and what your purpose
W-62.1. It is your forgiveness that will bring the world of darkness to the light. 2 It is your
W-62.2. Illusions about yourself and the world are one. 2 That is why all forgiveness is a gift to
W-62.3. Remember that in every attack you call upon your own weakness, while each time you
W-62.4. Let us be glad to begin and end this day by practicing today's idea, and to use it as
W-62.5. As often as you can, closing your eyes if possible, say to yourself today:
W-63.1. How holy are you who have the power to bring peace to every mind! 2 How blessed are
W-63.2. You are indeed the light of the world with such a function. 2 The Son of God looks to you
W-63.3. Recognizing the importance of this function, we will be happy to remember it very often
W-63.4. If you close your eyes, you will probably find it easier to let the related thoughts come to
W-64.1. Today's idea is merely another way of saying "Let me not wander into temptation." 2 The
W-64.2. Nothing the body's eyes seem to see can be anything but a form of temptation, since this
W-64.3. To review our last few lessons, your function here is to be the light of the world, a function
W-64.4. Only by fulfilling the function given you by God will you be happy. 2 That is because your
W-64.5. Let us remember this today. 2 Let us remind ourselves of it in the morning and again at
W-64.6. Today, then, let us practice with these thoughts:
W-64.7. In the frequent applications of today's idea throughout the day, devote several minutes to
W-64.8. Two forms of shorter practice periods are required. 2 At times, do the exercises with your
W-65.1. The idea for today reaffirms your commitment to salvation. 2 It also reminds you that you
W-65.2. This is the only way in which you can take your rightful place among the saviors of the
W-65.3. Today, and for a number of days to follow, set aside ten to fifteen minutes for a more
W-65.4. Try, if possible, to undertake the daily extended practice periods at approximately the same
W-65.5. For the longer practice period, begin by reviewing the idea for the day. 2 Then close your
W-65.6. After a while, interfering thoughts will become harder to find. 2 Try, however, to continue
W-65.7. Finally, repeat the idea for today once more, and devote the rest of the practice period to
W-65.8. In the shorter practice periods, which should be undertaken at least once an hour, use this
W-66.1. You have surely noticed an emphasis throughout our recent lessons on the connection
W-66.2. The ego does constant battle with the Holy Spirit on the fundamental question of what your
W-66.3. Today we will try to go past this wholly meaningless battle and arrive at the truth about
W-66.4. Our longer practice period today has as its purpose your acceptance of the fact that not only
W-66.5. Begin the ten-to-fifteen-minute practice period by reviewing these thoughts:
W-66.6. The first premise is that God gives you only happiness. 2 This could be false, of course, but
W-66.7. The second premise is that God has given you your function. 2 We have seen that there are
W-66.8. Thus, it must be that your function is established by God through His Voice, or is made by
W-66.9. Think about this during the longer practice period today. 2 Think also about the many
W-66.10. You will listen to madness or hear the truth. 2 Try to make this choice as you think about
W-66.11. In the shorter practice periods, which would be most helpful today if undertaken twice an
W-67.1. Today's idea is a complete and accurate statement of what you are. 2 This is why you are
W-67.2. In the longer practice period, we will think about your reality and its wholly unchanged and
W-67.3. After you have gone over several such related thoughts, try to let all thoughts drop away
W-67.4. You may find it necessary to repeat the idea for today from time to time to replace
W-67.5. It will be particularly helpful today to practice the idea for the day as often as you can. 2
W-67.6. Try to realize in the shorter practice periods that this is not your tiny, solitary voice that
W-68.1. You who were created by love like itself can hold no grievances and know your Self. 2 To
W-68.2. Shut off from your Self, which remains aware of Its likeness to Its Creator, your Self seems
W-68.3. It is as sure that those who hold grievances will redefine God in their own image, as it is
W-68.4. Would you not be willing to relinquish your grievances if you believed all this were so? 2
W-68.5. Begin today's extended practice period by searching your mind for those against whom you
W-68.6. Determine now to see all these people as friends. 2 Say to them all, thinking of each one in
W-68.7. The short practice periods should include a quick application of today's idea in this form,
W-69.1. No one can look upon what your grievances conceal. 2 Because your grievances are hiding
W-69.2. Today let us make another real attempt to reach the light in you. 2 Before we undertake this
W-69.3. Let us begin our longer practice period today with the full realization that this is so, and
W-69.4. Very quietly now, with your eyes closed, try to let go of all the content that generally
W-69.5. From where you stand, you can see no reason to believe there is a brilliant light hidden by
W-69.6. After you have thought about the importance of what you are trying to do for yourself and
W-69.7. If you are doing the exercises properly, you will begin to feel a sense of being lifted up and
W-69.8. Have confidence in your Father today, and be certain that He has heard you and answered
W-69.9. In the shorter practice periods, which you will want to do as often as possible in view of
W-70.1. All temptation is nothing more than some form of the basic temptation not to believe the
W-70.2. The seeming cost of accepting today's idea is this: It means that nothing outside yourself
W-70.3. It may not, however, be clear to you why the recognition that guilt is in your own mind
W-70.4. You have tried to do just the opposite, making every attempt, however distorted and
W-70.5. Today we practice realizing that God's Will and ours are really the same in this. 2 God
W-70.6. We are ready for two longer practice periods today, each of which should last some ten to
W-70.7. Begin these practice periods by repeating the idea for today, adding a statement signifying
W-70.8. Now we will try again to reach the light in you, which is where your salvation is. 2 You
W-70.9. Since all illusions of salvation have failed you, surely you do not want to remain in the
W-70.10. For the short and frequent practice periods today, remind yourself that your salvation
W-71.1. You may not realize that the ego has set up a plan for salvation in opposition to God's. 2 It
W-71.2. The ego's plan for salvation centers around holding grievances. 2 It maintains that, if
W-71.3. The role assigned to your own mind in this plan, then, is simply to determine what, other
W-71.4. Such is the ego's plan for your salvation. 2 Surely you can see how it is in strict accord with
W-71.5. God's plan for salvation works simply because, by following His direction, you seek for
W-71.6. How can you escape all this? 2 Very simply. 3 The idea for today is the answer. 4 Only
W-71.7. Let us practice recognizing this certainty today. 2 And let us rejoice that there is an answer
W-71.8. Begin the two longer practice periods for today by thinking about today's idea, and
W-71.9. Remembering this, let us devote the remainder of the extended practice periods to asking
W-71.10. In the shorter practice periods, tell yourself often that God's plan for salvation, and only
W-72.1. While we have recognized that the ego's plan for salvation is the opposite of God's, we
W-72.2. The ego's fundamental wish is to replace God. 2 In fact, the ego is the physical
W-72.3. Although the attempt to keep the limitations that a body would impose is obvious here, it is
W-72.4. You are not dealing here with what the person is. 2 On the contrary, you are exclusively
W-72.5. If God is a body, what must His plan for salvation be? 2 What could it be but death? 3 In
W-72.6. To this carefully prepared arena, where angry animals seek for prey and mercy cannot
W-72.7. This is the universal belief of the world you see. 2 Some hate the body, and try to hurt and
W-72.8. We will try today to stop these senseless attacks on salvation. 2 We will try to welcome it
W-72.9. The light of truth is in us, where it was placed by God. 2 It is the body that is outside us,
W-72.10. Our goal in the longer practice periods today is to become aware that God's plan for
W-72.11. Now we would see and hear and learn. 2 "What is salvation, Father?" 3 Ask and you will
W-72.12. Whenever you feel your confidence wane and your hope of success flicker and go out,
W-72.13. One or perhaps two shorter practice periods an hour will be enough for today, since they
W-73.1. Today we are considering the will you share with God. 2 This is not the same as the ego's
W-73.2. Idle wishes and grievances are partners or co-makers in picturing the world you see. 2 The
W-73.3. Your will is lost to you in this strange bartering, in which guilt is traded back and forth,
W-73.4. Today we will try once more to reach the world that is in accordance with your will. 2 The
W-73.5. Your picture of the world can only mirror what is within. 2 The source of neither light nor
W-73.6. Forget the ego's arguments which seek to prove all this is really Heaven. 2 You know it is
W-73.7. We will succeed today if you remember that you want salvation for yourself. 2 You want to
W-73.8. Therefore, we undertake the exercises for today in happy confidence, certain that we will
W-73.9. We will begin our longer practice periods with the recognition that God's plan for salvation,
W-73.10. After reminding yourself of this, and determining to keep your will clearly in mind, tell
W-73.11. In the shorter practice periods, again make a declaration of what you really want. 2 Say:
W-74.1. The idea for today can be regarded as the central thought toward which all our exercises
W-74.2. There is great peace in today's idea, and the exercises for today are directed towards
W-74.3. Begin the longer practice periods by repeating these thoughts several times, slowly and
W-74.4. If there is one conflict area that seems particularly difficult to resolve, single it out for
W-74.5. After you have cleared your mind in this way, close your eyes and try to experience the
W-74.6. Joy characterizes peace. 2 By this experience will you recognize that you have reached it. 3
W-74.7. In the shorter periods, which should be undertaken at regular and predetermined intervals
W-75.1. The light has come. 2 You are healed and you can heal. 3 The light has come. 4 You are
W-75.2. Today we celebrate the happy ending to your long dream of disaster. 2 There are no dark
W-75.3. Our exercises for today will be happy ones, in which we offer thanks for the passing of the
W-75.4. Our longer practice periods will be devoted to looking at the world that our forgiveness
W-75.5. We do not want to see the ego's shadow on the world today. 2 We see the light, and in it
W-75.6. Dwell not upon the past today. 2 Keep a completely open mind, washed of all past ideas
W-75.7. Realize that your forgiveness entitles you to vision. 2 Understand that the Holy Spirit never
W-75.8. Tell Him you know you cannot fail because you trust in Him. 2 And tell yourself you wait
W-75.9. The shorter practice periods, too, will be joyful reminders of your release. 2 Remind
W-75.10. Say, then:
W-75.11. We dedicate this day to the serenity in which God would have you be. 2 Keep it in your
W-76.1. We have observed before how many senseless things have seemed to you to be salvation. 2
W-76.2. Today we will be glad you cannot prove it. 2 For if you could, you would forever seek
W-76.3. Think of the freedom in the recognition that you are not bound by all the strange and
W-76.4. It is insanity that thinks these things. 2 You call them laws, and put them under different
W-76.5. These are not laws, but madness. 2 The body is endangered by the mind that hurts itself. 3
W-76.6. There are no laws except the laws of God. 2 This needs repeating, over and over, until you
W-76.7. The laws of God can never be replaced. 2 We will devote today to rejoicing that this is so.
W-76.8. We will begin the longer practice periods today with a short review of the different kinds
W-76.9. There are no laws but God's. 2 Dismiss all foolish magical beliefs today, and hold your
W-76.10. Hear Him Who tells you this, and realize how foolish are the "laws" you thought upheld
W-76.11. Let us today open God's channels to Him, and let His Will extend through us to Him. 2
W-76.12. We will repeat this dedication as often as possible today; at least four or five times an
W-77.1. You are entitled to miracles because of what you are. 2 You will receive miracles because
W-77.2. Your claim to miracles does not lie in your illusions about yourself. 2 It does not depend
W-77.3. Today we will claim the miracles which are your right, since they belong to you. 2 You
W-77.4. Begin the longer practice periods by telling yourself quite confidently that you are entitled
W-77.5. After this brief introductory phase, wait quietly for the assurance that your request is
W-77.6. In doing this, you do not really ask for anything. 2 You state a fact that cannot be denied. 3
W-77.7. Our shorter practice periods will be frequent, and will also be devoted to a reminder of a
W-77.8. Remember, too, not to be satisfied with less than the perfect answer. 2 Be quick to tell
W-78.1. Perhaps it is not yet quite clear to you that each decision that you make is one between a
W-78.2. Today we go beyond the grievances, to look upon the miracle instead. 2 We will reverse
W-78.3. He waits for you behind your grievances, and as you lay them down he will appear in
W-78.4. Today we will attempt to see God's Son. 2 We will not let ourselves be blind to him; we
W-78.5. You know the one to choose; his name has crossed your mind already. 2 He will be the one
W-78.6. Our longer practice periods today will see him in this role. 2 You will attempt to hold him
W-78.7. Then let us ask of Him Who knows this Son of God in his reality and truth, that we may
W-78.8. What you have asked for cannot be denied. 2 Your savior has been waiting long for this. 3
W-78.9. God thanks you for these quiet times today in which you laid your images aside, and
W-78.10. We will remember this throughout the day, and take the role assigned to us as part of
W-79.1. A problem cannot be solved if you do not know what it is. 2 Even if it is really solved
W-79.2. Everyone in this world seems to have his own special problems. 2 Yet they are all the
W-79.3. That is the position in which you find yourself now. 2 You have the answer, but you are
W-79.4. The temptation to regard problems as many is the temptation to keep the problem of
W-79.5. No one could solve all the problems the world appears to hold. 2 They seem to be on so
W-79.6. All this complexity is but a desperate attempt not to recognize the problem, and therefore
W-79.7. In our longer practice periods today we will ask what the problem is, and what is the
W-79.8. The exercises for today will be successful to the extent to which you do not insist on
W-79.9. The shorter practice periods for today will not be set by time, but by need. 2 You will see
W-79.10. Be not deceived by the form of problems today. 2 Whenever any difficulty seems to rise,
W-80.1. If you are willing to recognize your problems, you will recognize that you have no
W-80.2. Your only problem has been solved! 2 Repeat this over and over to yourself today, with
W-80.3. You are entitled to peace today. 2 A problem that has been resolved cannot trouble you. 3
W-80.4. In our longer practice periods today, we will claim the peace that must be ours when the
W-80.5. Now let the peace that your acceptance brings be given you. 2 Close your eyes, and receive
W-80.6. Assure yourself often today that your problems have been solved. 2 Repeat the idea with
W-80.7. Let us be determined not to collect grievances today. 2 Let us be determined to be free of
W-rII.in.1. We are now ready for another review. 2 We will begin where our last review left off,
W-rII.in.2. The longer practice periods will follow this general form: Take about fifteen minutes for
W-rII.in.3. Repeat the first phase of the exercise period if you find your mind wandering, but try to
W-rII.in.4. Do not allow your intent to waver in the face of distracting thoughts. 2 Realize that,
W-rII.in.5. Regard these practice periods as dedications to the way, the truth and the life. 2 Refuse
W-rII.in.6. Reaffirm your determination in the shorter practice periods as well, using the original
W-81.1. (61) I am the light of the world.
W-81.2. Some specific forms for applying this idea when special difficulties seem to arise might be:
W-81.3. (62) Forgiveness is my function as the light of the world.
W-81.4. Specific forms for using this idea might include:
W-82.1. (63) The light of the world brings peace to every mind through my forgiveness.
W-82.2. Suggestions for specific forms for applying this idea are:
W-82.3. (64) Let me not forget my function.
W-82.4. Suitable specific forms of this idea include:
W-83.1. (65) My only function is the one God gave me.
W-83.2. More specific applications of this idea might take these forms:
W-83.3. (66) My happiness and my function are one.
W-83.4. Some useful forms for specific applications of this idea are:
W-84.1. (67) Love created me like itself.
W-84.2. You might find these specific forms helpful in applying the idea:
W-84.3. (68) Love holds no grievances.
W-84.4. These specific forms for applying this idea would be helpful:
W-85.1. (69) My grievances hide the light of the world in me.
W-85.2. Specific applications for this idea might be made in these forms:
W-85.3. (70) My salvation comes from me.
W-85.4. These forms of the idea are suitable for more specific applications:
W-86.1. (71) Only God's plan for salvation will work.
W-86.2. These are some suggested forms for applying this idea specifically:
W-86.3. (72) Holding grievances is an attack on God's plan for salvation.
W-86.4. Specific applications for this idea might be in these forms:
W-87.1. (73) I will there be light.
W-87.2. These forms of this idea would be helpful for specific applications:
W-87.3. (74) There is no will but God's.
W-87.4. These are some useful forms of this idea for specific applications:
W-88.1. (75) The light has come.
W-88.2. These would prove useful forms for specific applications of this idea:
W-88.3. (76) I am under no laws but God's.
W-88.4. For specific forms in applying this idea, these would be useful:
W-89.1. (77) I am entitled to miracles.
W-89.2. You might use these suggestions for specific applications of this idea:
W-89.3. (78) Let miracles replace all grievances.
W-89.4. Useful specific forms for applying this idea would be:
W-90.1. (79) Let me recognize the problem so it can be solved.
W-90.2. Specific applications of this idea might be in these forms:
W-90.3. (80) Let me recognize my problems have been solved.
W-90.4. These forms of the idea will be useful for specific applications:
W-91.1. It is important to remember that miracles and vision necessarily go together. 2 This needs
W-91.2. To you, then, light is crucial. 2 While you remain in darkness, the miracle remains unseen.
W-91.3. To be told that what you do not see is there sounds like insanity. 2 It is very difficult to
W-91.4. Your efforts, however little they may be, have strong support. 2 Did you but realize how
W-91.5. Three times today, set aside about ten minutes for a quiet time in which you try to leave
W-91.6. Begin the longer practice periods with this statement of true cause and effect relationships:
W-91.7. If you are not a body, what are you? 2 You need to be aware of what the Holy Spirit uses
W-91.8. If you are not a body, what are you? 2 Ask this in honesty, and then devote several minutes
W-91.9. In the second phase of the exercise period, try to experience these truths about yourself. 2
W-91.10. Relax for the rest of the practice period, confident that your efforts, however meager, are
W-91.11. Five or six times an hour, at reasonably regular intervals, remind yourself that miracles
W-92.1. The idea for today is an extension of the previous one. 2 You do not think of light in terms
W-92.2. You also believe the body's brain can think. 2 If you but understood the nature of thought,
W-92.3. It is God's strength in you that is the light in which you see, as it is His Mind with which
W-92.4. Strength overlooks these things by seeing past appearances. 2 It keeps its steady gaze upon
W-92.5. Strength comes from truth, and shines with light its Source has given it; weakness reflects
W-92.6. Weakness, which looks in darkness, cannot see a purpose in forgiveness and in love. 2 It
W-92.7. It fears and it attacks and hates itself, and darkness covers everything it sees, leaving its
W-92.8. The light of strength is constant, sure as love, forever glad to give itself away, because it
W-92.9. The strength in you will offer you the light, and guide your seeing so you do not dwell on
W-92.10. Let us give twenty minutes twice today to join this meeting. 2 Let yourself be brought
W-92.11. Morning and evening we will practice thus. 2 After the morning meeting, we will use the
W-93.1. You think you are the home of evil, darkness and sin. 2 You think if anyone could see the
W-93.2. These are beliefs so firmly fixed that it is difficult to help you see that they are based on
W-93.3. Today we question this, not from the point of view of what you think, but from a very
W-93.4. Why would you not be overjoyed to be assured that all the evil that you think you did was
W-93.5. The self you made is not the Son of God. 2 Therefore, this self does not exist at all. 3 And
W-93.6. Your sinlessness is guaranteed by God. 2 Over and over this must be repeated, until it is
W-93.7. Salvation requires the acceptance of but one thought;--you are as God created you, not
W-93.8. In our longer exercise periods today, which would be most profitable if done for the first
W-93.9. You are what God created or what you made. 2 One Self is true; the other is not there. 3
W-93.10. You may not be willing or even able to use the first five minutes of each hour for these
W-93.11. If a situation arises that seems to be disturbing, quickly dispel the illusion of fear by
W-94.1. Today we continue with the one idea which brings complete salvation; the one statement
W-94.2. True light is strength, and strength is sinlessness. 2 If you remain as God created you, you
W-94.3. Today we will again devote the first five minutes of each waking hour to the attempt to feel
W-94.4. Nothing is required of you to reach this goal except to lay all idols and self-images aside;
W-94.5. If you do not meet the requirement of practicing for the first five minutes of every hour, at
W-95.1. Today's idea accurately describes you as God created you. 2 You are one within yourself,
W-95.2. You see yourself as a ridiculous parody on God's creation; weak, vicious, ugly and sinful,
W-95.3. We will attempt today to be aware only of what can hear and see, and what makes perfect
W-95.4. The use of the first five minutes of every waking hour for practicing the idea for the day
W-95.5. Frequent but shorter practice periods have other advantages for you at this time. 2 In
W-95.6. Structure, then, is necessary for you at this time, planned to include frequent reminders of
W-95.7. We will, therefore, keep to the five-minutes-an-hour practice periods for a while, and urge
W-95.8. The Holy Spirit is not delayed in His teaching by your mistakes. 2 He can be held back
W-95.9. When you fail to comply with the requirements of this course, you have merely made a
W-95.10. Let all these errors go by recognizing them for what they are. 2 They are attempts to keep
W-95.11. Begin the practice periods today with this assurance, offered to your mind with all the
W-95.12. You are one Self, united and secure in light and joy and peace. 2 You are God's Son, one
W-95.13. You are one Self, in perfect harmony with all there is, and all that there will be. 2 You are
W-95.14. Do not forget today. 2 We need your help; your little part in bringing happiness to all the
W-95.15. Your own acknowledgment you are one Self, united with your Father, is a call to all the
W-96.1. Although you are one Self, you experience yourself as two; as both good and evil, loving
W-96.2. The fact that truth and illusion cannot be reconciled, no matter how you try, what means
W-96.3. Problems that have no meaning cannot be resolved within the framework they are set. 2
W-96.4. Spirit makes use of mind as means to find its Self expression. 2 And the mind which serves
W-96.5. Yet mind apart from spirit cannot think. 2 It has denied its Source of strength, and sees
W-96.6. Waste no more time on this. 2 Who can resolve the senseless conflicts which a dream
W-96.7. Your Self retains Its Thoughts, and they remain within your mind and in the Mind of God.
W-96.8. We will attempt today to find this thought, whose presence in your mind is guaranteed by
W-96.9. Begin with saying this:
W-96.10. If you succeed, the thoughts that come to you will tell you you are saved, and that your
W-96.11. Your Self knows that you cannot fail today. 2 Perhaps your mind remains uncertain yet a
W-96.12. Each time today you tell your frantic mind salvation comes from your one Self, you lay
W-97.1. Today's idea identifies you with your one Self. 2 It accepts no split identity, nor tries to
W-97.2. We state again the truth about your Self, the holy Son of God Who rests in you; whose
W-97.3. Today we try to bring reality still closer to your mind. 2 Each time you practice, awareness
W-97.4. You are the spirit in whose mind abides the miracle in which all time stands still; the
W-97.5. The Holy Spirit will be glad to take five minutes of each hour from your hands, and carry
W-97.6. Thus will each gift to Him be multiplied a thousandfold and tens of thousands more. 2 And
W-97.7. Begin these happy exercises with the words the Holy Spirit speaks to you, and let them
W-97.8. Offer each practice period today gladly to Him. 2 And He will speak to you, reminding you
W-98.1. Today is a day of special dedication. 2 We take a stand on but one side today. 3 We side
W-98.2. How happy to be certain! 2 All our doubts we lay aside today, and take our stand with
W-98.3. The guiltless have no fear, for they are safe and recognize their safety. 2 They do not
W-98.4. They will be with us; all who took the stand we take today will gladly offer us all that they
W-98.5. Is it not worth five minutes of your time each hour to be able to accept the happiness that
W-98.6. Here is an offer guaranteeing you your full release from pain of every kind, and joy the
W-98.7. Each hour today give Him your tiny gift of but five minutes. 2 He will give the words you
W-98.8. In each five minutes that you spend with Him, He will accept your words and give them
W-98.9. Give Him the words, and He will do the rest. 2 He will enable you to understand your
W-98.10. Throughout the hour, let your time be spent in happy preparation for the next five minutes
W-98.11. And when the hour goes and He is there once more to spend a little time with you, be
W-99.1. Salvation and forgiveness are the same. 2 They both imply that something has gone wrong;
W-99.2. Truth and illusions both are equal now, for both have happened. 2 The impossible becomes
W-99.3. How could there be a meeting place at all where earth and Heaven can be reconciled within
W-99.4. What joins the separated mind and thoughts with Mind and Thought which are forever
W-99.5. The Holy Spirit holds this plan of God exactly as it was received of Him within the Mind
W-99.6. This is the Thought that brings illusions to the truth, and sees them as appearances behind
W-99.7. You who will yet work miracles, be sure you practice well the idea for today. 2 Try to
W-99.8. This part belongs to God, as does the rest. 2 It does not think its solitary thoughts, and
W-99.9. Practice His Thought today, and let His light seek out and lighten up all darkened spots,
W-99.10. Forgive all thoughts which would oppose the truth of your completion, unity and peace. 2
W-99.11. There is a special message for today which has the power to remove all forms of doubt
W-99.12. Your only function tells you you are one. 2 Remind yourself of this between the times you
W-100.1. Just as God's Son completes his Father, so your part in it completes your Father's plan. 2
W-100.2. God's Will for you is perfect happiness. 2 Why should you choose to go against His Will?
W-100.3. You are indeed essential to God's plan. 2 Without your joy, His joy is incomplete. 3
W-100.4. You are indeed essential to God's plan. 2 Just as your light increases every light that
W-100.5. We will not let ourselves be sad today. 2 For if we do, we fail to take the part that is
W-100.6. Today we will attempt to understand joy is our function here. 2 If you are sad, your part is
W-100.7. We will prepare ourselves for this today, in our five-minute practice periods, by feeling
W-100.8. Now let us try to find that joy that proves to us and all the world God's Will for us. 2 It is
W-100.9. He will be there. 2 And you can reach Him now. 3 What could you rather look upon in
W-100.10. He will be there. 2 You are essential to His plan. 3 You are His messenger today. 4 And
W-101.1. Today we will continue with the theme of happiness. 2 This is a key idea in
W-101.2. If sin is real, then punishment is just and cannot be escaped. 2 Salvation thus cannot be
W-101.3. If sin is real, salvation must be pain. 2 Pain is the cost of sin, and suffering can never be
W-101.4. Who would seek out such savage punishment? 2 Who would not flee salvation, and
W-101.5. You need the practice periods today. 2 The exercises teach sin is not real, and all that you
W-101.6. God's Will for you is perfect happiness because there is no sin, and suffering is causeless.
W-101.7. Give these five minutes gladly, to remove the heavy load you lay upon yourself with the
W-102.1. You do not want to suffer. 2 You may think it buys you something, and may still believe
W-102.2. Today we try to loose its weakened hold still further, and to realize that pain is
W-102.3. For several days we will continue to devote our periods of practicing to exercises planned
W-102.4. Begin your practice periods today with this acceptance of God's Will for you:
W-102.5. Be happy, for your only function here is happiness. 2 You have no need to be less loving
W-103.1. Happiness is an attribute of love. 2 It cannot be apart from it. 3 Nor can it be experienced
W-103.2. Fear is associated then with love, and its results become the heritage of minds that think
W-103.3. Allow this one correction to be placed within your mind each waking hour today. 2 Then
W-104.1. Today's idea continues with the thought that joy and peace are not but idle dreams. 2 They
W-104.2. Today we would remove all meaningless and self-made gifts which we have placed upon
W-104.3. Therefore, we choose to have them now, and know, in choosing them in place of what we
W-104.4. All this we lay aside, and seek instead that which is truly ours, as we ask to recognize
W-104.5. So do we clear the way for Him today by simply recognizing that His Will is done
W-105.1. God's peace and joy are yours. 2 Today we will accept them, knowing they belong to us. 3
W-105.2. No gift is given thus. 2 Such "gifts" are but a bid for a more valuable return; a loan with
W-105.3. A major learning goal this course has set is to reverse your view of giving, so you can
W-105.4. As Heaven's peace and joy intensify when you accept them as God's gift to you, so does
W-105.5. Today accept God's peace and joy as yours. 2 Let Him complete Himself as He defines
W-105.6. Today our practice periods will start a little differently. 2 Begin today by thinking of those
W-105.7. Think of your "enemies" a little while, and tell each one, as he occurs to you:
W-105.8. You must succeed today, if you prepare your mind as we suggest. 2 For you have let all
W-105.9. Spend your five minutes thus with Him each time you can today, but do not think that less
W-106.1. If you will lay aside the ego's voice, however loudly it may seem to call; if you will not
W-106.2. Listen, and hear your Father speak to you through His appointed Voice, which silences
W-106.3. Be not afraid today to circumvent the voices of the world. 2 Walk lightly past their
W-106.4. Today the promise of God's Word is kept. 2 Hear and be silent. 3 He would speak to you.
W-106.5. Hear Him today, and listen to the Word which lifts the veil that lies upon the earth, and
W-106.6. Be ready for salvation. 2 It is here, and will today be given unto you. 3 And you will learn
W-106.7. Thus does salvation start and thus it ends; when everything is yours and everything is
W-106.8. Ask and expect an answer. 2 Your request is one whose answer has been waiting long to
W-106.9. Be still and listen to the truth today. 2 For each five minutes spent in listening, a thousand
W-106.10. Today the holy Word of God is kept through your receiving it to give away, so you can
W-107.1. What can correct illusions but the truth? 2 And what are errors but illusions that remain
W-107.2. Can you imagine what a state of mind without illusions is? 2 How it would feel? 3 Try to
W-107.3. And now you have a hint, not more than just the faintest intimation of the state your mind
W-107.4. When truth has come it does not stay a while, to disappear or change to something else. 2
W-107.5. When truth has come it harbors in its wings the gift of perfect constancy, and love which
W-107.6. Truth does not come and go nor shift nor change, in this appearance now and then in that,
W-107.7. We do not ask for what we do not have. 2 We merely ask for what belongs to us, that we
W-107.8. Begin by asking Him Who goes with you upon this undertaking that He be in your
W-107.9. Truth will correct all errors in your mind which tell you you could be apart from Him. 2
W-107.10. And yet you will be glad to look again upon this world. 2 For you will bring with you
W-107.11. Do not forget your function for today. 2 Each time you tell yourself with confidence,
W-108.1. Vision depends upon today's idea. 2 The light is in it, for it reconciles all seeming
W-108.2. True light that makes true vision possible is not the light the body's eyes behold. 2 It is a
W-108.3. This is the light that shows no opposites, and vision, being healed, has power to heal. 2
W-108.4. Here are both giving and receiving seen as different aspects of one Thought whose truth
W-108.5. One thought, completely unified, will serve to unify all thought. 2 This is the same as
W-108.6. To learn that giving and receiving are the same has special usefulness, because it can be
W-108.7. Today we practice with the special case of giving and receiving. 2 We will use this simple
W-108.8. So we begin the practice periods with the instruction for today, and say:
W-108.9. Say each one slowly and then pause a while, expecting to receive the gift you gave. 2
W-108.10. Our very simple lesson for today will teach you much. 2 Effect and cause will be far
W-109.1. We ask for rest today, and quietness unshaken by the world's appearances. 2 We ask for
W-109.2. "I rest in God." 2 This thought will bring to you the rest and quiet, peace and stillness,
W-109.3. "I rest in God." 2 Completely undismayed, this thought will carry you through storms and
W-109.4. This is the day of peace. 2 You rest in God, and while the world is torn by winds of hate
W-109.5. In Him you have no cares and no concerns, no burdens, no anxiety, no pain, no fear of
W-109.6. Each hour that you take your rest today, a tired mind is suddenly made glad, a bird with
W-109.7. With each five minutes that you rest today, the world is nearer waking. 2 And the time
W-109.8. You rest within the peace of God today, and call upon your brothers from your rest to
W-109.9. You rest within the peace of God today, quiet and unafraid. 2 Each brother comes to take
W-110.1. We will repeat today's idea from time to time. 2 For this one thought would be enough to
W-110.2. Today's idea is therefore all you need to let complete correction heal your mind, and give
W-110.3. If you remain as God created you, appearances cannot replace the truth, health cannot turn
W-110.4. In this one thought is all the past undone; the present saved to quietly extend into a
W-110.5. The healing power of today's idea is limitless. 2 It is the birthplace of all miracles, the
W-110.6. For your five-minute practice periods, begin with this quotation from the text:
W-110.7. Then, with this statement firmly in your mind, try to discover in your mind the Self Who
W-110.8. Seek Him within you Who is Christ in you, the Son of God and brother to the world; the
W-110.9. You are as God created you. 2 Today honor your Self. 3 Let graven images you made to
W-110.10. Seek Him today, and find Him. 2 He will be your Savior from all idols you have made. 3
W-110.11. We will remember Him throughout the day with thankful hearts and loving thoughts for
W-rIII.in.1. Our next review begins today. 2 We will review two recent lessons every day for ten
W-rIII.in.2. We understand, of course, that it may be impossible for you to undertake what is
W-rIII.in.3. But learning will be hampered when you skip a practice period because you are
W-rIII.in.4. Those practice periods that you have lost because you did not want to do them, for
W-rIII.in.5. The format you should use for these reviews is this: Devote five minutes twice a day, or
W-rIII.in.6. Place the ideas within your mind, and let it use them as it chooses. 2 Give it faith that it
W-rIII.in.7. You have been given them in perfect trust; in perfect confidence that you would use
W-rIII.in.8. We emphasize the benefits to you if you devote the first five minutes of the day to your
W-rIII.in.9. The exercises to be done throughout the day are equally important, and perhaps of even
W-rIII.in.10. In these reviews, we stress the need to let your learning not lie idly by between your
W-rIII.in.11. If you are shaken, think of it again. 2 These practice periods are planned to help you
W-rIII.in.12. Each day's review assignments will conclude with a restatement of the thought to use
W-rIII.in.13.
W-111.1. (91) Miracles are seen in light.
W-111.2. (92) Miracles are seen in light, and light and strength are one.
W-111.3. On the hour:
W-112.1. (93) Light and joy and peace abide in me.
W-112.2. (94) I am as God created me.
W-112.3. On the hour:
W-113.1. (95) I am one Self, united with my Creator.
W-113.2. (96) Salvation comes from my one Self.
W-113.3. On the hour:
W-114.1. (97) I am spirit.
W-114.2. (98) I will accept my part in God's plan for salvation.
W-114.3. On the hour:
W-115.1. (99) Salvation is my only function here.
W-115.2. (100) My part is essential to God's plan for salvation.
W-115.3. On the hour:
W-116.1. (101) God's Will for me is perfect happiness.
W-116.2. (102) I share God's Will for happiness for me.
W-116.3. On the hour:
W-117.1. (103) God, being Love, is also happiness.
W-117.2. (104) I seek but what belongs to me in truth.
W-117.3. On the hour:
W-118.1. (105) God's peace and joy are mine.
W-118.2. (106) Let me be still and listen to the truth.
W-118.3. On the hour:
W-119.1. (107) Truth will correct all errors in my mind.
W-119.2. (108) To give and to receive are one in truth.
W-119.3. On the hour:
W-120.1. (109) I rest in God.
W-120.2. (110) I am as God created me.
W-120.3. On the hour:
W-121.1. Here is the answer to your search for peace. 2 Here is the key to meaning in a world that
W-121.2. The unforgiving mind is full of fear, and offers love no room to be itself; no place where
W-121.3. The unforgiving mind is torn with doubt, confused about itself and all it sees; afraid and
W-121.4. The unforgiving mind sees no mistakes, but only sins. 2 It looks upon the world with
W-121.5. The unforgiving mind is in despair, without the prospect of a future which can offer
W-121.6. Forgiveness is acquired. 2 It is not inherent in the mind, which cannot sin. 3 As sin is an
W-121.7. Each unforgiving mind presents you with an opportunity to teach your own how to
W-121.8. Today we practice learning to forgive. 2 If you are willing, you can learn today to take the
W-121.9. The unforgiving mind does not believe that giving and receiving are the same. 2 Yet we
W-121.10. Begin the longer practice periods by thinking of someone you do not like, who seems to
W-121.11. Now close your eyes and see him in your mind, and look at him a while. 2 Try to
W-121.12. Look at this changed perception for a while, and turn your mind to one you call a friend.
W-121.13. Then let him offer you the light you see in him, and let your "enemy" and friend unite in
W-122.1. What could you want forgiveness cannot give? 2 Do you want peace? 3 Forgiveness
W-122.2. All this forgiveness offers you, and more. 2 It sparkles on your eyes as you awake, and
W-122.3. Forgiveness lets the veil be lifted up that hides the face of Christ from those who look
W-122.4. Why would you seek an answer other than the answer that will answer everything? 2 Here
W-122.5. God's plan for your salvation cannot change, nor can it fail. 2 Be thankful it remains
W-122.6. Here is the answer! 2 Would you stand outside while all of Heaven waits for you within?
W-122.7. Here is the answer! 2 Do not turn away in aimless wandering again. 3 Accept salvation
W-122.8. Open your eyes today and look upon a happy world of safety and of peace. 2 Forgiveness
W-122.9. Remembering the gifts forgiveness gives, we undertake our practicing today with hope
W-122.10. Morning and evening do we gladly give a quarter of an hour to the search in which the
W-122.11. Sink into happiness as you begin these practice periods, for they hold out the sure
W-122.12. Before the light you will receive today the world will fade until it disappears, and you
W-122.13. Forgiveness offers everything you want. 2 Today all things you want are given you. 3
W-122.14. Be tempted not to let your gifts slip by and drift into forgetfulness, but hold them firmly
W-123.1. Today let us be thankful. 2 We have come to gentler pathways and to smoother roads. 3
W-123.2. A day devoted now to gratitude will add the benefit of some insight into the real extent of
W-123.3. Give thanks that He has not abandoned you, and that His Love forever will remain
W-123.4. Today in gratitude we lift our hearts above despair, and raise our thankful eyes, no longer
W-123.5. We do not go alone. 2 And we give thanks that in our solitude a Friend has come to speak
W-123.6. Thanks be to you who heard, for you become the messenger who brings His Voice with
W-123.7. Receive His thanks and offer yours to Him for fifteen minutes twice today. 2 And you
W-123.8. Receive His thanks, and you will understand how lovingly He holds you in His Mind,
W-124.1. Today we will again give thanks for our Identity in God. 2 Our home is safe, protection
W-124.2. How holy are our minds! 2 And everything we see reflects the holiness within the mind at
W-124.3. What we receive is our eternal gift to those who follow after, and to those who went
W-124.4. Today we will not doubt His Love for us, nor question His protection and His care. 2 No
W-124.5. We see it in appearances of pain, and pain gives way to peace. 2 We see it in the frantic,
W-124.6. No miracle can ever be denied to those who know that they are one with God. 2 No
W-124.7. We join in this awareness as we say that we are one with God. 2 For in these words we
W-124.8. Peace be to you today. 2 Secure your peace by practicing awareness you are one with
W-124.9. Your benefit will not be less if you believe that nothing happens. 2 You may not be ready
W-124.10. Perhaps today, perhaps tomorrow, you will see your own transfiguration in the glass this
W-124.11. Perhaps today, perhaps tomorrow, you will look into this glass, and understand the
W-124.12. Add further jewels to the golden frame that holds the mirror offered you today, by hourly
W-125.1. Let this day be a day of stillness and of quiet listening. 2 Your Father wills you hear His
W-125.2. This world will change through you. 2 No other means can save it, for God's plan is
W-125.3. In stillness we will hear God's Voice today without intrusion of our petty thoughts,
W-125.4. Hear, holy Son of God, your Father speak. 2 His Voice would give to you His holy Word,
W-125.5. He has not waited until you return your mind to Him to give His Word to you. 2 He has
W-125.6. Today He speaks to you. 2 His Voice awaits your silence, for His Word can not be heard
W-125.7. Three times today, at times most suitable for silence, give ten minutes set apart from
W-125.8. It is your voice to which you listen as He speaks to you. 2 It is your word He speaks. 3 It
W-125.9. Only be quiet. 2 You will need no rule but this, to let your practicing today lift you above
W-126.1. Today's idea, completely alien to the ego and the thinking of the world, is crucial to the
W-126.2. Let us consider what you do believe, in place of this idea. 2 It seems to you that other
W-126.3. When you "forgive" a sin, there is no gain to you directly. 2 You give charity to one
W-126.4. Thus is forgiveness basically unsound; a charitable whim, benevolent yet undeserved, a
W-126.5. If this be true, forgiveness has no grounds on which to rest dependably and sure. 2 It is an
W-126.6. You do not understand forgiveness. 2 As you see it, it is but a check upon overt attack,
W-126.7. Not having given Him the gift He asks of you, you cannot recognize His gifts, and think
W-126.8. Today we try to understand the truth that giver and receiver are the same. 2 You will need
W-126.9. Give fifteen minutes twice today to the attempt to understand today's idea. 2 It is the
W-126.10. In silence, close your eyes upon the world that does not understand forgiveness, and seek
W-126.11. As often as you can, remind yourself you have a goal today; an aim which makes this
W-127.1. Perhaps you think that different kinds of love are possible. 2 Perhaps you think there is a
W-127.2. Love's meaning is obscure to anyone who thinks that love can change. 2 He does not see
W-127.3. Love cannot judge. 2 As it is one itself, it looks on all as one. 3 Its meaning lies in
W-127.4. No course whose purpose is to teach you to remember what you really are could fail to
W-127.5. No law the world obeys can help you grasp love's meaning. 2 What the world believes
W-127.6. Seek not within the world to find your Self. 2 Love is not found in darkness and in death.
W-127.7. If you achieve the faintest glimmering of what love means today, you have advanced in
W-127.8. For fifteen minutes twice today escape from every law in which you now believe. 2 Open
W-127.9. Call to your Father, certain that His Voice will answer. 2 He Himself has promised this. 3
W-127.10. Today the legion of the future years of waiting for salvation disappears before the
W-127.11. The world in infancy is newly born. 2 And we will watch it grow in health and strength,
W-127.12. We will remember them throughout the day, because we cannot leave a part of us
W-128.1. The world you see holds nothing that you need to offer you; nothing that you can use in
W-128.2. Each thing you value here is but a chain that binds you to the world, and it will serve no
W-128.3. Escape today the chains you place upon your mind when you perceive salvation here. 2
W-128.4. Let nothing that relates to body thoughts delay your progress to salvation, nor permit
W-128.5. Today we practice letting go all thought of values we have given to the world. 2 We leave
W-128.6. Pause and be still a little while, and see how far you rise above the world, when you
W-128.7. Give it ten minutes rest three times today. 2 And when your eyes are opened afterwards,
W-128.8. Protect your mind throughout the day as well. 2 And when you think you see some value
W-129.1. This is the thought that follows from the one we practiced yesterday. 2 You cannot stop
W-129.2. It might be worth a little time to think once more about the value of this world. 2 Perhaps
W-129.3. Is it a loss to find a world instead where losing is impossible; where love endures forever,
W-129.4. Communication, unambiguous and plain as day, remains unlimited for all eternity. 2 And
W-129.5. Now is the last step certain; now you stand an instant's space away from timelessness. 2
W-129.6. Such is the choice. 2 What loss can be for you in choosing not to value nothingness? 3
W-129.7. Practice your willingness to make this change ten minutes in the morning and at night,
W-129.8. Today the lights of Heaven bend to you, to shine upon your eyelids as you rest beyond the
W-129.9. Now do we understand there is no loss. 2 For we have seen its opposite at last, and we are
W-130.1. Perception is consistent. 2 What you see reflects your thinking. 3 And your thinking but
W-130.2. Yet who can really hate and love at once? 2 Who can desire what he does not want to
W-130.3. What, then, can fear project upon the world? 2 What can be seen in darkness that is real?
W-130.4. Fear has made everything you think you see. 2 All separation, all distinctions, and the
W-130.5. It is impossible to see two worlds which have no overlap of any kind. 2 Seek for the one;
W-130.6. Today we will attempt no compromise where none is possible. 2 The world you see is
W-130.7. Six times today, in thanks and gratitude, we gladly give five minutes to the thought that
W-130.8. Begin your searching for the other world by asking for a strength beyond your own, and
W-130.9. God will be there. 2 For you have called upon the great unfailing power which will take
W-130.10. Dismiss temptation easily today whenever it arises, merely by remembering the limits of
W-130.11. Accept a little part of hell as real, and you have damned your eyes and cursed your sight,
W-131.1. Failure is all about you while you seek for goals that cannot be achieved. 2 You look for
W-131.2. Goals that are meaningless are not attained. 2 There is no way to reach them, for the
W-131.3. Yet searching is inevitable here. 2 For this you came, and you will surely do the thing you
W-131.4. Be glad that search you must. 2 Be glad as well to learn you search for Heaven, and must
W-131.5. No one remains in hell, for no one can abandon his Creator, nor affect His perfect,
W-131.6. Why wait for Heaven? 2 It is here today. 3 Time is the great illusion it is past or in the
W-131.7. Heaven remains your one alternative to this strange world you made and all its ways; its
W-131.8. God does not suffer conflict. 2 Nor is His creation split in two. 3 How could it be His Son
W-131.9. Today we will not choose a paradox in place of truth. 2 How could the Son of God make
W-131.10. Leave foolish thoughts like these behind today, and turn your mind to true ideas instead.
W-131.11. This we acknowledge as we start upon our practice periods. 2 Begin with this:
W-131.12. Seek for that door and find it. 2 But before you try to open it, remind yourself no one
W-131.13. Put out your hand, and see how easily the door swings open with your one intent to go
W-131.14. You cannot fail today. 2 There walks with you the Spirit Heaven sent you, that you
W-131.15. Remember often that today should be a time of special gladness, and refrain from dismal
W-132.1. What keeps the world in chains but your beliefs? 2 And what can save the world except
W-132.2. Yet is salvation easily achieved, for anyone is free to change his mind, and all his
W-132.3. The present now remains the only time. 2 Here in the present is the world set free. 3 For
W-132.4. The world is nothing in itself. 2 Your mind must give it meaning. 3 And what you behold
W-132.5. There is no world apart from what you wish, and herein lies your ultimate release. 2
W-132.6. But it is pride that argues you have come into a world quite separate from yourself,
W-132.7. But healing is the gift of those who are prepared to learn there is no world, and can accept
W-132.8. And some will find it in this course, and in the exercises that we do today. 2 Today's idea
W-132.9. A lesson earlier repeated once must now be stressed again, for it contains the firm
W-132.10. What is the lesson for today except another way of saying that to know your Self is the
W-132.11. Yet if you are as God created you, you cannot think apart from Him, nor make what
W-132.12. Release the world! 2 Your real creations wait for this release to give you fatherhood, not
W-132.13. There is no world because it is a thought apart from God, and made to separate the
W-132.14. Today our purpose is to free the world from all the idle thoughts we ever held about it,
W-132.15. Begin the fifteen-minute periods in which we practice twice today with this:
W-132.16. You need not realize that healing comes to many brothers far across the world, as well as
W-132.17. Throughout the day, increase the freedom sent through your ideas to all the world, and
W-133.1. Sometimes in teaching there is benefit, particularly after you have gone through what
W-133.2. You do not ask too much of life, but far too little. 2 When you let your mind be drawn to
W-133.3. Today we list the real criteria by which to test all things you think you want. 2 Unless
W-133.4. We have already stressed there are but two, however many there appear to be. 2 The
W-133.5. Another kindly and related law is that there is no compromise in what your choice must
W-133.6. First, if you choose a thing that will not last forever, what you chose is valueless. 2 A
W-133.7. Next, if you choose to take a thing away from someone else, you will have nothing left. 2
W-133.8. Your next consideration is the one on which the others rest. 2 Why is the choice you
W-133.9. Yet is its camouflage a thin veneer, which could deceive but those who are content to be
W-133.10. Yet though he tries to keep its halo clear within his vision, still must he perceive its
W-133.11. And so we come to the criterion for choice that is the hardest to believe, because its
W-133.12. All things are valuable or valueless, worthy or not of being sought at all, entirely
W-133.13. Heaven itself is reached with empty hands and open minds, which come with nothing to
W-133.14. And then receive what waits for everyone who reaches, unencumbered, to the gate of
W-134.1. Let us review the meaning of "forgive," for it is apt to be distorted and to be perceived as
W-134.2. This twisted view of what forgiveness means is easily corrected, when you can accept the
W-134.3. The major difficulty that you find in genuine forgiveness on your part is that you still
W-134.4. Because you think your sins are real, you look on pardon as deception. 2 For it is
W-134.5. Pardon is no escape in such a view. 2 It merely is a further sign that sin is unforgivable, at
W-134.6. It is sin's unreality that makes forgiveness natural and wholly sane, a deep relief to those
W-134.7. Forgiveness is the only thing that stands for truth in the illusions of the world. 2 It sees
W-134.8. The strength of pardon is its honesty, which is so uncorrupted that it sees illusions as
W-134.9. There is a very simple way to find the door to true forgiveness, and perceive it open wide
W-134.10. Thus will you see alternatives for choice in terms that render choosing meaningful, and
W-134.11. Across this bridge, as powerful as love which laid its blessing on it, are all dreams of
W-134.12. He does not have to fight to save himself. 2 He does not have to kill the dragons which
W-134.13. Forgiveness must be practiced, for the world cannot perceive its meaning, nor provide a
W-134.14. Today we practice true forgiveness, that the time of joining be no more delayed. 2 For
W-134.15. Then choose one brother as He will direct, and catalogue his "sins," as one by one they
W-134.16. Let him be freed from all the thoughts you had of sin in him. 2 And now you are
W-134.17. Forgiveness should be practiced through the day, for there will still be many times when
W-135.1. Who would defend himself unless he thought he were attacked, that the attack were real,
W-135.2. You operate from the belief you must protect yourself from what is happening because it
W-135.3. Defense is frightening. 2 It stems from fear, increasing fear as each defense is made. 3
W-135.4. Let us consider first what you defend. 2 It must be something that is very weak and easily
W-135.5. Yet it is not the body that can fear, nor be a thing of fear. 2 It has no needs but those
W-135.6. Is not this picture fearful? 2 Can you be at peace with such a concept of your home? 3
W-135.7. The body is in need of no defense. 2 This cannot be too often emphasized. 3 It will be
W-135.8. The "self" that needs protection is not real. 2 The body, valueless and hardly worth the
W-135.9. Defend the body and you have attacked your mind. 2 For you have seen in it the faults,
W-135.10. These are the thoughts in need of healing, and the body will respond with health when
W-135.11. A healed mind does not plan. 2 It carries out the plans that it receives through listening
W-135.12. A healed mind is relieved of the belief that it must plan, although it cannot know the
W-135.13. Enslavement of the body to the plans the unhealed mind sets up to save itself must make
W-135.14. It is, perhaps, not easy to perceive that self-initiated plans are but defenses, with the
W-135.15. The mind engaged in planning for itself is occupied in setting up control of future
W-135.16. The mind that plans is thus refusing to allow for change. 2 What it has learned before
W-135.17. Defenses are the plans you undertake to make against the truth. 2 Their aim is to select
W-135.18. What could you not accept, if you but knew that everything that happens, all events, past,
W-135.19. Your present trust in Him is the defense that promises a future undisturbed, without a
W-135.20. Without defenses, you become a light which Heaven gratefully acknowledges to be its
W-135.21. We will anticipate that time today with present confidence, for this is part of what was
W-135.22. For fifteen minutes twice today we rest from senseless planning, and from every thought
W-135.23. Nothing but that. 2 If there are plans to make, you will be told of them. 3 They may not
W-135.24. All your defenses have been aimed at not receiving what you will receive today. 2 And
W-135.25. He has remembered you. 2 Today we will remember Him. 3 For this is Eastertime in
W-135.26. Try not to shape this day as you believe would benefit you most. 2 For you can not
W-136.1. No one can heal unless he understands what purpose sickness seems to serve. 2 For then
W-136.2. Sickness is not an accident. 2 Like all defenses, it is an insane device for self-deception. 3
W-136.3. Defenses are not unintentional, nor are they made without awareness. 2 They are secret,
W-136.4. Who but yourself evaluates a threat, decides escape is necessary, and sets up a series of
W-136.5. It is this quick forgetting of the part you play in making your "reality" that makes defenses
W-136.6. Every defense takes fragments of the whole, assembles them without regard to all their
W-136.7. Sickness is a decision. 2 It is not a thing that happens to you, quite unsought, which makes
W-136.8. How do you think that sickness can succeed in shielding you from truth? 2 Because it
W-136.9. Thus is the body stronger than the truth, which asks you live, but cannot overcome your
W-136.10. Such is your planning for your own defense. 2 And you believe that Heaven quails
W-136.11. God knows not of your plans to change His Will. 2 The universe remains unheeding of
W-136.12. Such is the simple truth. 2 It does not make appeal to might nor triumph. 3 It does not
W-136.13. It is this fact that demonstrates that time is an illusion. 2 For time lets you think what
W-136.14. Truth has a power far beyond defense, for no illusions can remain where truth has been
W-136.15. This is our aim today. 2 And we will give a quarter of an hour twice to ask the truth to
W-136.16. Healing will flash across your open mind, as peace and truth arise to take the place of
W-136.17. Now is the body healed, because the source of sickness has been opened to relief. 2 And
W-136.18. Perhaps you do not realize that this removes the limits you had placed upon the body by
W-136.19. Yet this protection needs to be preserved by careful watching. 2 If you let your mind
W-136.20. Give instant remedy, should this occur, by not allowing your defensiveness to hurt you
W-137.1. Today's idea remains the central thought on which salvation rests. 2 For healing is the
W-137.2. Sickness is isolation. 2 For it seems to keep one self apart from all the rest, to suffer what
W-137.3. The world obeys the laws that sickness serves, but healing operates apart from them. 2 It
W-137.4. Sickness would prove that lies must be the truth. 2 But healing demonstrates that truth is
W-137.5. Healing might thus be called a counter-dream, which cancels out the dream of sickness in
W-137.6. Yet think not healing is unworthy of your function here. 2 For anti-Christ becomes more
W-137.7. Just as forgiveness shines away all sin and the real world will occupy the place of what
W-137.8. Healing is freedom. 2 For it demonstrates that dreams will not prevail against the truth. 3
W-137.9. Healing, forgiveness, and the glad exchange of all the world of sorrow for a world where
W-137.10. And as you let yourself be healed, you see all those around you, or who cross your mind,
W-137.11. Those who are healed become the instruments of healing. 2 Nor does time elapse
W-137.12. Would you not offer shelter to God's Will? 2 You but invite your Self to be at home. 3
W-137.13. We will remember, as the hour strikes, our function is to let our minds be healed, that we
W-137.14. Yet must we be prepared for such a gift. 2 And so we will begin the day with this, and
W-137.15. Let healing be through you this very day. 2 And as you rest in quiet, be prepared to give
W-138.1. In this world Heaven is a choice, because here we believe there are alternatives to choose
W-138.2. Creation knows no opposite. 2 But here is opposition part of being "real." 3 It is this
W-138.3. Choice is the obvious escape from what appears as opposites. 2 Decision lets one of
W-138.4. You need to be reminded that you think a thousand choices are confronting you, when
W-138.5. Choosing depends on learning. 2 And the truth cannot be learned, but only recognized. 3
W-138.6. In this insanely complicated world, Heaven appears to take the form of choice, rather than
W-138.7. So we begin today considering the choice that time was made to help us make. 2 Such is
W-138.8. These mad beliefs can gain unconscious hold of great intensity, and grip the mind with
W-138.9. Heaven is chosen consciously. 2 The choice cannot be made until alternatives are
W-138.10. The conscious choice of Heaven is as sure as is the ending of the fear of hell, when it is
W-138.11. We make the choice for Heaven as we wake, and spend five minutes making sure that
W-138.12. Before we close our eyes in sleep tonight, we reaffirm the choice that we have made
W-139.1. Here is the end of choice. 2 For here we come to a decision to accept ourselves as God
W-139.2. Yet who could ask this question except one who has refused to recognize himself? 2 Only
W-139.3. Uncertainty about what you must be is self-deception on a scale so vast, its magnitude
W-139.4. He merely states that he is not himself, and therefore, being something else, becomes a
W-139.5. Thus he becomes uncertain of his life, for what it is has been denied by him. 2 It is for
W-139.6. Atonement remedies the strange idea that it is possible to doubt yourself, and be unsure of
W-139.7. Nothing the world believes is true. 2 It is a place whose purpose is to be a home where
W-139.8. Only acceptance can be asked of you, for what you are is certain. 2 It is set forever in the
W-139.9. We have a mission here. 2 We did not come to reinforce the madness that we once
W-139.10. This does Atonement teach, and demonstrates the Oneness of God's Son is unassailed by
W-139.11. Five minutes in the morning and at night we will devote to dedicate our minds to our
W-139.12. In thanks for all creation, in the Name of its Creator and His Oneness with all aspects of
W-140.1. "Cure" is a word that cannot be applied to any remedy the world accepts as beneficial. 2
W-140.2. He is not healed. 2 He merely had a dream that he was sick, and in the dream he found a
W-140.3. The happy dreams the Holy Spirit brings are different from the dreaming of the world,
W-140.4. Atonement heals with certainty, and cures all sickness. 2 For the mind which understands
W-140.5. Peace be to you who have been cured in God, and not in idle dreams. 2 For cure must
W-140.6. This is the thought that cures. 2 It does not make distinctions among unrealities. 3 Nor
W-140.7. Let us not try today to seek to cure what cannot suffer sickness. 2 Healing must be sought
W-140.8. Today we seek to change our minds about the source of sickness, for we seek a cure for
W-140.9. We will not be misled today by what appears to us as sick. 2 We go beyond appearances
W-140.10. So do we lay aside our amulets, our charms and medicines, our chants and bits of magic
W-140.11. We waken hearing Him, and let Him speak to us five minutes as the day begins, and end
W-140.12. With nothing in our hands to which we cling, with lifted hearts and listening minds we
W-rIV.in.1. Now we review again, this time aware we are preparing for the second part of learning
W-rIV.in.2. There is a central theme that unifies each step in the review we undertake, which can
W-rIV.in.3. Let us begin our preparation with some understanding of the many forms in which the
W-rIV.in.4. And yet, your mind holds only what you think with God. 2 Your self-deceptions cannot
W-rIV.in.5. Begin each day with time devoted to the preparation of your mind to learn what each
W-rIV.in.6. They will not come from you alone, for they will all be shared with Him. 2 And so each
W-rIV.in.7. After your preparation, merely read each of the two ideas assigned to you to be
W-rIV.in.8. Each hour of the day, bring to your mind the thought with which the day began, and
W-rIV.in.9. We add no other thoughts, but let these be the messages they are. 2 We need no more
W-rIV.in.10. God offers thanks to you who practice thus the keeping of His Word. 2 And as you
W-141.1. (121) Forgiveness is the key to happiness.
W-141.2. (122) Forgiveness offers everything I want.
W-142.1. (123) I thank my Father for His gifts to me.
W-142.2. (124) Let me remember I am one with God.
W-143.1. (125) In quiet I receive God's Word today.
W-143.2. (126) All that I give is given to myself.
W-144.1. (127) There is no love but God's.
W-144.2. (128) The world I see holds nothing that I want.
W-145.1. (129) Beyond this world there is a world I want.
W-145.2. (130) It is impossible to see two worlds.
W-146.1. (131) No one can fail who seeks to reach the truth.
W-146.2. (132) I loose the world from all I thought it was.
W-147.1. (133) I will not value what is valueless.
W-147.2. (134) Let me perceive forgiveness as it is.
W-148.1. (135) If I defend myself I am attacked.
W-148.2. (136) Sickness is a defense against the truth.
W-149.1. (137) When I am healed I am not healed alone.
W-149.2. (138) Heaven is the decision I must make.
W-150.1. (139) I will accept Atonement for myself.
W-150.2. (140) Only salvation can be said to cure.
W-151.1. No one can judge on partial evidence. 2 That is not judgment. 3 It is merely an opinion
W-151.2. You do not seem to doubt the world you see. 2 You do not really question what is shown
W-151.3. How can you judge? 2 Your judgment rests upon the witness that your senses offer you. 3
W-151.4. Can this be judgment? 2 You have often been urged to refrain from judging, not because
W-151.5. This thing it speaks of, and would yet defend, it tells you is yourself. 2 And you believe
W-151.6. Hear not its voice. 2 The witnesses it sends to prove to you its evil is your own are false,
W-151.7. Yet you must learn to doubt their evidence will clear the way to recognize yourself, and
W-151.8. Let Him be Judge of what you are, for He has certainty in which there is no doubt,
W-151.9. And thus He judges you. 2 Accept His Word for what you are, for He bears witness to
W-151.10. He will remove all faith that you have placed in pain, disaster, suffering and loss. 2 He
W-151.11. He will select the elements in them which represent the truth, and disregard those aspects
W-151.12. Such is your resurrection, for your life is not a part of anything you see. 2 It stands
W-151.13. We practice wordlessly today, except at the beginning of the time we spend with God. 2
W-151.14. Give Him your thoughts, and He will give them back as miracles which joyously
W-151.15. Spend fifteen minutes thus when you awake, and gladly give another fifteen more before
W-151.16. Such is your Eastertide. 2 And so you lay the gift of snow-white lilies on the world,
W-151.17. And we will hourly remember Him Who is salvation and deliverance. 2 As we give
W-152.1. No one can suffer loss unless it be his own decision. 2 No one suffers pain except his
W-152.2. You may believe that this position is extreme, and too inclusive to be true. 2 Yet can truth
W-152.3. Salvation is the recognition that the truth is true, and nothing else is true. 2 This you have
W-152.4. This is the simplest of distinctions, yet the most obscure. 2 But not because it is a difficult
W-152.5. As God created you, you must remain unchangeable, with transitory states by definition
W-152.6. Is it not strange that you believe to think you made the world you see is arrogance? 2 God
W-152.7. To think that God made chaos, contradicts His Will, invented opposites to truth, and
W-152.8. Let us today be truly humble, and accept what we have made as what it is. 2 The power
W-152.9. Today we practice true humility, abandoning the false pretense by which the ego seeks to
W-152.10. The power of decision is our own. 2 And we accept of Him that which we are, and
W-152.11. Now do we join in glad acknowledgment that lies are false, and only truth is true. 2 We
W-152.12. In patience wait for Him throughout the day, and hourly invite Him with the words with
W-153.1. You who feel threatened by this changing world, its twists of fortune and its bitter jests,
W-153.2. The world gives rise but to defensiveness. 2 For threat brings anger, anger makes attack
W-153.3. It is as if a circle held it fast, wherein another circle bound it and another one in that, until
W-153.4. Defenses are the costliest of all the prices which the ego would exact. 2 In them lies
W-153.5. You are its slave. 2 You know not what you do, in fear of it. 3 You do not understand
W-153.6. Defenselessness is strength. 2 It testifies to recognition of the Christ in you. 3 Perhaps you
W-153.7. Defensiveness is weakness. 2 It proclaims you have denied the Christ and come to fear
W-153.8. We will not play such childish games today. 2 For our true purpose is to save the world,
W-153.9. We look past dreams today, and recognize that we need no defense because we are
W-153.10. Be still a moment, and in silence think how holy is your purpose, how secure you rest,
W-153.11. It is the function of God's ministers to help their brothers choose as they have done. 2
W-153.12. Salvation can be thought of as a game that happy children play. 2 It was designed by
W-153.13. You who have played that you are lost to hope, abandoned by your Father, left alone in
W-153.14. We pause but for a moment more, to play our final, happy game upon this earth. 2 And
W-153.15. Today we practice in a form we will maintain for quite a while. 2 We will begin each
W-153.16. Each hour adds to our increasing peace, as we remember to be faithful to the Will we
W-153.17. Yet when we can, we will observe our trust as ministers of God, in hourly remembrance
W-153.18. In time, with practice, you will never cease to think of Him, and hear His loving Voice
W-153.19. Today our theme is our defenselessness. 2 We clothe ourselves in it, as we prepare to
W-153.20. Your practicing will now begin to take the earnestness of love, to help you keep your
W-154.1. Let us today be neither arrogant nor falsely humble. 2 We have gone beyond such
W-154.2. Whatever your appointed role may be, it was selected by the Voice for God, Whose
W-154.3. It is through His ability to hear one Voice which is His Own that you become aware at
W-154.4. It is this joining, through the Voice for God, of Father and of Son, that sets apart salvation
W-154.5. A messenger is not the one who writes the message he delivers. 2 Nor does he question
W-154.6. There is one major difference in the role of Heaven's messengers, which sets them off
W-154.7. An earthly messenger fulfills his role by giving all his messages away. 2 The messengers
W-154.8. Would you receive the messages of God? 2 For thus do you become His messenger. 3
W-154.9. You who are now the messenger of God, receive His messages. 2 For that is part of your
W-154.10. It is this joining that we undertake to recognize today. 2 We will not seek to keep our
W-154.11. We practice giving Him what He would have, that we may recognize His gifts to us. 2
W-154.12. Let us but learn this lesson for today: We will not recognize what we receive until we
W-154.13. Our lesson for today is stated thus:
W-154.14. The world recedes as we light up our minds, and realize these holy words are true. 2
W-155.1. There is a way of living in the world that is not here, although it seems to be. 2 You do
W-155.2. The world is an illusion. 2 Those who choose to come to it are seeking for a place where
W-155.3. This is the simple choice we make today. 2 The mad illusion will remain awhile in
W-155.4. If truth demanded they give up the world, it would appear to them as if it asked the
W-155.5. Between these paths there is another road that leads away from loss of every kind, for
W-155.6. Illusion still appears to cling to you, that you may reach them. 2 Yet it has stepped back. 3
W-155.7. All roads will lead to this one in the end. 2 For sacrifice and deprivation are paths that
W-155.8. Such is salvation's call, and nothing more. 2 It asks that you accept the truth, and let it go
W-155.9. Walk safely now, yet carefully, because this path is new to you. 2 And you may find that
W-155.10. Yet at the journey's ending there will be no gap, no distance between truth and you. 2
W-155.11. When dreams are over, time has closed the door on all the things that pass and miracles
W-155.12. We walk to God. 2 Pause and reflect on this. 3 Could any way be holier, or more
W-155.13. Your feet are safely set upon the road that leads the world to God. 2 Look not to ways
W-155.14. And now He asks but that you think of Him a while each day, that He may speak to you
W-156.1. Today's idea but states the simple truth that makes the thought of sin impossible. 2 It
W-156.2. We are not inconsistent in the thoughts that we present in our curriculum. 2 Truth must be
W-156.3. Yet where He is, there must be holiness as well as life. 2 No attribute of His remains
W-156.4. There is a light in you which cannot die; whose presence is so holy that the world is
W-156.5. The light in you is what the universe longs to behold. 2 All living things are still before
W-156.6. This is the way salvation works. 2 As you step back, the light in you steps forward and
W-156.7. Yet you have wasted many, many years on just this foolish thought. 2 The past is gone,
W-156.8. "Who walks with me?" 2 This question should be asked a thousand times a day, till
W-157.1. This is a day of silence and of trust. 2 It is a special time of promise in your calendar of
W-157.2. This is another crucial turning point in the curriculum. 2 We add a new dimension now; a
W-157.3. Today it will be given you to feel a touch of Heaven, though you will return to paths of
W-157.4. He will direct your practicing today, for what you ask for now is what He wills. 2 And
W-157.5. From this day forth, your ministry takes on a genuine devotion, and a glow that travels
W-157.6. Your body will be sanctified today, its only purpose being now to bring the vision of what
W-157.7. As this experience increases and all goals but this become of little worth, the world to
W-157.8. Today we will embark upon a course you have not dreamed of. 2 But the Holy One, the
W-157.9. Into Christ's Presence will we enter now, serenely unaware of everything except His
W-158.1. What has been given you? 2 The knowledge that you are a mind, in Mind and purely
W-158.2. You have received all this. 2 No one who walks the world but has received it. 3 It is not
W-158.3. The time is set already. 2 It appears to be quite arbitrary. 3 Yet there is no step along the
W-158.4. Time is a trick, a sleight of hand, a vast illusion in which figures come and go as if by
W-158.5. A teacher does not give experience, because he did not learn it. 2 It revealed itself to him
W-158.6. Here is the joining of the world of doubt and shadows made with the intangible. 2 Here is
W-158.7. Christ's vision has one law. 2 It does not look upon a body, and mistake it for the Son
W-158.8. This can be taught; and must be taught by all who would achieve it. 2 It requires but the
W-158.9. Thus are his sins forgiven him, for Christ has vision that has power to overlook them all. 2
W-158.10. Thus do you learn to give as you receive. 2 And thus Christ's vision looks on you as
W-158.11. It matters not when revelation comes, for that is not of time. 2 Yet time has still one gift
W-159.1. No one can give what he has not received. 2 To give a thing requires first you have it in
W-159.2. You understand that you are healed when you give healing. 2 You accept forgiveness as
W-159.3. Christ's vision is a miracle. 2 It comes from far beyond itself, for it reflects eternal love
W-159.4. Christ's vision is the miracle in which all miracles are born. 2 It is their source, remaining
W-159.5. Christ's vision is the bridge between the worlds. 2 And in its power can you safely trust to
W-159.6. This is the Holy Spirit's single gift; the treasure house to which you can appeal with
W-159.7. Here does the world remember what was lost when it was made. 2 For here it is repaired,
W-159.8. Christ's vision is the holy ground in which the lilies of forgiveness set their roots. 2 This
W-159.9. Take from His storehouse, that its treasures may increase. 2 His lilies do not leave their
W-159.10. Behold the store of miracles set out for you to give. 2 Are you not worth the gift, when
W-160.1. Fear is a stranger to the ways of love. 2 Identify with fear, and you will be a stranger to
W-160.2. There is a stranger in our midst, who comes from an idea so foreign to the truth he speaks
W-160.3. What reason is there for not saying this? 2 What could the reason be except that you had
W-160.4. Who is the stranger? 2 Is it fear or you who are unsuited to the home which God provided
W-160.5. How simply, then, the question is resolved. 2 Who fears has but denied himself and said,
W-160.6. What does he search for now? 2 What can he find? 3 A stranger to himself can find no
W-160.7. Who is the stranger? 2 Is he not the one your Self calls not? 3 You are unable now to
W-160.8. God's certainty suffices. 2 Who He knows to be His Son belongs where He has set His
W-160.9. Today we offer thanks that Christ has come to search the world for what belongs to Him.
W-160.10. Not one does Christ forget. 2 Not one He fails to give you to remember, that your home
W-161.1. Today we practice differently, and take a stand against our anger, that our fears may
W-161.2. Complete abstraction is the natural condition of the mind. 2 But part of it is now
W-161.3. Thus were specifics made. 2 And now it is specifics we must use in practicing. 3 We give
W-161.4. One brother is all brothers. 2 Every mind contains all minds, for every mind is one. 3
W-161.5. It seems to be the body that we feel limits our freedom, makes us suffer, and at last puts
W-161.6. Bodies attack, but minds do not. 2 This thought is surely reminiscent of our text, where it
W-161.7. Hate is specific. 2 There must be a thing to be attacked. 3 An enemy must be perceived in
W-161.8. Who sees a brother as a body sees him as fear's symbol. 2 And he will attack, because
W-161.9. This do the body's eyes behold in one whom Heaven cherishes, the angels love and God
W-161.10. Today we practice in a form we have attempted earlier. 2 Your readiness is closer now,
W-161.11. Select one brother, symbol of the rest, and ask salvation of him. 2 See him first as
W-161.12. And He will answer Whom you called upon. 2 For He will hear the Voice for God in
W-162.1. This single thought, held firmly in the mind, would save the world. 2 From time to time
W-162.2. Here is the Word by which the Son became his Father's happiness, His Love and His
W-162.3. Holy indeed is he who makes these words his own; arising with them in his mind,
W-162.4. Today we practice simply. 2 For the words we use are mighty, and they need no thoughts
W-162.5. We honor you today. 2 Yours is the right to perfect holiness you now accept. 3 With this
W-162.6. And who would not be brother to you now; you, his redeemer and his savior. 2 Who
W-163.1. Death is a thought that takes on many forms, often unrecognized. 2 It may appear as
W-163.2. Embodiment of fear, the host of sin, god of the guilty and the lord of all illusions and
W-163.3. All things but death are seen to be unsure, too quickly lost however hard to gain,
W-163.4. Would you bow down to idols such as this? 2 Here is the strength and might of God
W-163.5. Unholy in defeat, he has become what death would have him be. 2 His epitaph, which
W-163.6. It is impossible to worship death in any form, and still select a few you would not cherish
W-163.7. The idea of the death of God is so preposterous that even the insane have difficulty in
W-163.8. Death's worshippers may be afraid. 2 And yet, can thoughts like these be fearful? 3 If
W-163.9. Our Father, bless our eyes today. 2 We are Your messengers, and we would look upon the
W-164.1. What time but now can truth be recognized? 2 The present is the only time there is. 3 And
W-164.2. The world fades easily away before His sight. 2 Its sounds grow dim. 3 A melody from far
W-164.3. How holy is your practicing today, as Christ gives you His sight and hears for you, and
W-164.4. There is a silence into which the world can not intrude. 2 There is an ancient peace you
W-164.5. This is the day when vain imaginings part like a curtain, to reveal what lies beyond them.
W-164.6. Brother, this day is sacred to the world. 2 Your vision, given you from far beyond all
W-164.7. We will not judge today. 2 We will receive but what is given us from judgment made
W-164.8. Open the curtain in your practicing by merely letting go all things you think you want. 2
W-164.9. Let not today slip by without the gifts it holds for you receiving your consent and your
W-165.1. What makes this world seem real except your own denial of the truth that lies beyond? 2
W-165.2. The Thought of God created you. 2 It left you not, nor have you ever been apart from it
W-165.3. Who would deny his safety and his peace, his joy, his healing and his peace of mind, his
W-165.4. Deny not Heaven. 2 It is yours today, but for the asking. 3 Nor need you perceive how
W-165.5. Ask with desire. 2 You need not be sure that you request the only thing you want. 3 But
W-165.6. Now is all doubting past, the journey's end made certain, and salvation given you. 2 Now
W-165.7. Practice today in hope. 2 For hope indeed is justified. 3 Your doubts are meaningless, for
W-165.8. We count on God, and not upon ourselves, to give us certainty. 2 And in His Name we
W-166.1. All things are given you. 2 God's trust in you is limitless. 3 He knows His Son. 4 He gives
W-166.2. Here is the paradox that underlies the making of the world. 2 This world is not the Will of
W-166.3. The gifts of God are not acceptable to anyone who holds such strange beliefs. 2 He must
W-166.4. Here is the only home he thinks he knows. 2 Here is the only safety he believes that he
W-166.5. Yet in his lonely, senseless wanderings, God's gifts go with him, all unknown to him. 2 He
W-166.6. He seems a sorry figure; weary, worn, in threadbare clothing, and with feet that bleed a
W-166.7. This is your chosen self, the one you made as a replacement for reality. 2 This is the self
W-166.8. You cower fearfully lest you should feel Christ's touch upon your shoulder, and perceive
W-166.9. Your ancient fear has come upon you now, and justice has caught up with you at last. 2
W-166.10. God's Will does not oppose. 2 It merely is. 3 It is not God you have imprisoned in your
W-166.11. Now do we live, for now we cannot die. 2 The wish for death is answered, and the sight
W-166.12. Yet He reminds you still of one thing more you had forgotten. 2 For His touch on you
W-166.13. The gifts are yours, entrusted to your care, to give to all who chose the lonely road you
W-166.14. Your sighs will now betray the hopes of those who look to you for their release. 2 Your
W-166.15. Betray it not. 2 Become the living proof of what Christ's touch can offer everyone. 3
W-167.1. There are not different kinds of life, for life is like the truth. 2 It does not have degrees. 3
W-167.2. In this world, there appears to be a state that is life's opposite. 2 You call it death. 3 Yet
W-167.3. You think that death is of the body. 2 Yet it is but an idea, irrelevant to what is seen as
W-167.4. Death is the thought that you are separate from your Creator. 2 It is the belief conditions
W-167.5. Death cannot come from life. 2 Ideas remain united to their source. 3 They can extend all
W-167.6. The mind can think it sleeps, but that is all. 2 It cannot change what is its waking state. 3
W-167.7. The opposite of life can only be another form of life. 2 As such, it can be reconciled with
W-167.8. God creates only mind awake. 2 He does not sleep, and His creations cannot share what
W-167.9. What seems to be the opposite of life is merely sleeping. 2 When the mind elects to be
W-167.10. Let us today be children of the truth, and not deny our holy heritage. 2 Our life is not as
W-167.11. His holy home we strive to keep today as He established it, and wills it be forever and
W-167.12. We share one life because we have one Source, a Source from which perfection comes
W-168.1. God speaks to us. 2 Shall we not speak to Him? 3 He is not distant. 4 He makes no
W-168.2. If you but knew the meaning of His Love, hope and despair would be impossible. 2 For
W-168.3. Today we ask of God the gift He has most carefully preserved within our hearts, waiting
W-168.4. God loves His Son. 2 Request Him now to give the means by which this world will
W-168.5. It is a new and holy day today, for we receive what has been given us. 2 Our faith lies in
W-168.6. And He descends to meet us, as we come to Him. 2 For what He has prepared for us He
W-169.1. Grace is an aspect of the Love of God which is most like the state prevailing in the unity
W-169.2. Grace is acceptance of the Love of God within a world of seeming hate and fear. 2 By
W-169.3. Grace is not learned. 2 The final step must go beyond all learning. 3 Grace is not the goal
W-169.4. We have perhaps appeared to contradict our statement that the revelation of the Father and
W-169.5. Oneness is simply the idea God is. 2 And in His Being, He encompasses all things. 3 No
W-169.6. We cannot speak nor write nor even think of this at all. 2 It comes to every mind when
W-169.7. This is beyond experience we try to hasten. 2 Yet forgiveness, taught and learned, brings
W-169.8. All learning was already in His Mind, accomplished and complete. 2 He recognized all
W-169.9. For oneness must be here. 2 Whatever time the mind has set for revelation is entirely
W-169.10. There is no need to further clarify what no one in the world can understand. 2 When
W-169.11. Suffice it, then, that you have work to do to play your part. 2 The ending must remain
W-169.12. Forgiveness is the central theme that runs throughout salvation, holding all its parts in
W-169.13. The interval suffices. 2 It is here that miracles are laid; to be returned by you from holy
W-169.14. Be grateful to return, as you were glad to go an instant, and accept the gifts that grace
W-169.15. Our learning goal today does not exceed this prayer. 2 Yet in the world, what could be
W-170.1. No one attacks without intent to hurt. 2 This can have no exception. 3 When you think
W-170.2. How thoroughly insane is the idea that to defend from fear is to attack! 2 For here is fear
W-170.3. It seems to be the enemy without that you attack. 2 Yet your defense sets up an enemy
W-170.4. If you consider carefully the means by which your fancied self-defense proceeds on its
W-170.5. Next, are the attributes of love bestowed upon its "enemy." 2 For fear becomes your
W-170.6. With love as enemy, must cruelty become a god. 2 And gods demand that those who
W-170.7. Today we look upon this cruel god dispassionately. 2 And we note that though his lips are
W-170.8. This moment can be terrible. 2 But it can also be the time of your release from abject
W-170.9. Yet do not think that fear is the escape from fear. 2 Let us remember what the text has
W-170.10. Where does the totally insane belief in gods of vengeance come from? 2 Love has not
W-170.11. The choice you make today is certain. 2 For you look for the last time upon this bit of
W-170.12. Now do your eyes belong to Christ, and He looks through them. 2 Now your voice
W-170.13. Father, we are like You. 2 No cruelty abides in us, for there is none in You. 3 Your peace
W-rV.in.1. We now review again. 2 This time we are ready to give more effort and more time to
W-rV.in.2. Steady our feet, our Father. 2 Let our doubts be quiet and our holy minds be still, and
W-rV.in.3. So do we bring our practicing to You. 2 And if we stumble, You will raise us up. 3 If we
W-rV.in.4. This is the thought which should precede the thoughts that we review. 2 Each one but
W-rV.in.5. And it is this that waits to meet us at the journey's ending. 2 Every step we take brings
W-rV.in.6. I take the journey with you. 2 For I share your doubts and fears a little while, that you
W-rV.in.7. My resurrection comes again each time I lead a brother safely to the place at which the
W-rV.in.8. Release me as you practice once again the thoughts I brought to you from Him Who
W-rV.in.9. Let this review be then your gift to me. 2 For this alone I need; that you will hear the
W-rV.in.10. Let this review become a time in which we share a new experience for you, yet one as
W-rV.in.11. With this we start each day of our review. 2 With this we start and end each period of
W-rV.in.12. Yet are the words but aids, and to be used, except at the beginning and the end of
W-171.1. (151) All things are echoes of the Voice for God.
W-171.2. (152) The power of decision is my own.
W-172.1. (153) In my defenselessness my safety lies.
W-172.2. (154) I am among the ministers of God.
W-173.1. (155) I will step back and let Him lead the way.
W-173.2. (156) I walk with God in perfect holiness.
W-174.1. (157) Into His Presence would I enter now.
W-174.2. (158) Today I learn to give as I receive.
W-175.1. (159) I give the miracles I have received.
W-175.2. (160) I am at home. 2 Fear is the stranger here.
W-176.1. (161) Give me your blessing, holy Son of God.
W-176.2. (162) I am as God created me.
W-177.1. (163) There is no death. 2 The Son of God is free.
W-177.2. (164) Now are we one with Him Who is our Source.
W-178.1. (165) Let not my mind deny the Thought of God.
W-178.2. (166) I am entrusted with the gifts of God.
W-179.1. (167) There is one life, and that I share with God.
W-179.2. (168) Your grace is given me. 2 I claim it now.
W-180.1. (169) By grace I live. 2 By grace I am released.
W-180.2. (170) There is no cruelty in God and none in me.
W-181.1. Trusting your brothers is essential to establishing and holding up your faith in your ability
W-181.2. Perception has a focus. 2 It is this that gives consistency to what you see. 3 Change but
W-181.3. Therefore, in practicing today, we first let all such little focuses give way to our great
W-181.4. A major hazard to success has been involvement with your past and future goals. 2 You
W-181.5. How could this matter? 2 For the past is gone; the future but imagined. 3 These concerns
W-181.6. We recognize that we have lost this goal if anger blocks our way in any form. 2 And if a
W-181.7. And we will also use this thought to keep us safe throughout the day. 2 We do not seek
W-181.8. Nor do we ask for fantasies. 2 For what we seek to look upon is really there. 3 And as our
W-181.9. The world which once proclaimed our sins becomes the proof that we are sinless. 2 And
W-182.1. This world you seem to live in is not home to you. 2 And somewhere in your mind you
W-182.2. No one but knows whereof we speak. 2 Yet some try to put by their suffering in games
W-182.3. We speak today for everyone who walks this world, for he is not at home. 2 He goes
W-182.4. Perhaps you think it is your childhood home that you would find again. 2 The childhood of
W-182.5. It is this Child in you your Father knows as His Own Son. 2 It is this Child Who knows
W-182.6. This Child needs your protection. 2 He is far from home. 3 He is so little that He seems so
W-182.7. This Child is your defenselessness; your strength. 2 He trusts in you. 3 He came because
W-182.8. When you are still an instant, when the world recedes from you, when valueless ideas
W-182.9. Rest with Him frequently today. 2 For He was willing to become a little Child that you
W-182.10. Christ is reborn as but a little Child each time a wanderer would leave his home. 2 For
W-182.11. Take time today to lay aside your shield which profits nothing, and lay down the spear
W-182.12. You have not lost your innocence. 2 It is for this you yearn. 3 This is your heart's desire.
W-183.1. God's Name is holy, but no holier than yours. 2 To call upon His Name is but to call upon
W-183.2. God's Name can not be heard without response, nor said without an echo in the mind that
W-183.3. Repeat God's Name, and all the world responds by laying down illusions. 2 Every dream
W-183.4. Repeat the Name of God, and little names have lost their meaning. 2 No temptation but
W-183.5. Repeat the Name of God, and call upon your Self, Whose Name is His. 2 Repeat His
W-183.6. Practice but this today; repeat God's Name slowly again and still again. 2 Become
W-183.7. Thus do we give an invitation which can never be refused. 2 And God will come, and
W-183.8. Repeat God's Name, and you acknowledge Him as sole Creator of reality. 2 And you
W-183.9. Today you can achieve a state in which you will experience the gift of grace. 2 You can
W-183.10. Turn to the Name of God for your release, and it is given you. 2 No prayer but this is
W-183.11. All little things are silent. 2 Little sounds are soundless now. 3 The little things of earth
W-184.1. You live by symbols. 2 You have made up names for everything you see. 3 Each one
W-184.2. This space you see as setting off all things from one another is the means by which the
W-184.3. What are these names by which the world becomes a series of discrete events, of things
W-184.4. This is the way reality is made by partial vision, purposefully set against the given truth. 2
W-184.5. Yet does this other vision still remain a natural direction for the mind to channel its
W-184.6. This is the sum of the inheritance the world bestows. 2 And everyone who learns to think
W-184.7. Such is the teaching of the world. 2 It is a phase of learning everyone who comes must go
W-184.8. Think not you made the world. 2 Illusions, yes! 3 But what is true in earth and Heaven is
W-184.9. It would indeed be strange if you were asked to go beyond all symbols of the world,
W-184.10. Thus what you need are intervals each day in which the learning of the world becomes a
W-184.11. Use all the little names and symbols which delineate the world of darkness. 2 Yet accept
W-184.12. God has no name. 2 And yet His Name becomes the final lesson that all things are one,
W-184.13. No one can fail who seeks the meaning of the Name of God. 2 Experience must come to
W-184.14. And though we use a different name for each awareness of an aspect of God's Son, we
W-184.15. Father, our Name is Yours. 2 In It we are united with all living things, and You Who are
W-185.1. To say these words is nothing. 2 But to mean these words is everything. 3 If you could but
W-185.2. No one can mean these words and not be healed. 2 He cannot play with dreams, nor think
W-185.3. Two minds with one intent become so strong that what they will becomes the Will of
W-185.4. Yet compromise alone a dream can bring. 2 Sometimes it takes the form of union, but
W-185.5. To mean you want the peace of God is to renounce all dreams. 2 For no one means these
W-185.6. The mind which means that all it wants is peace must join with other minds, for that is
W-185.7. Let us today devote our practicing to recognizing that we really mean the words we say. 2
W-185.8. Today devote your practice periods to careful searching of your mind, to find the dreams
W-185.9. This is the choice you make. 2 Be not deceived that it is otherwise. 3 No compromise is
W-185.10. You want the peace of God. 2 And so do all who seem to seek for dreams. 3 For them as
W-185.11. No one who truly seeks the peace of God can fail to find it. 2 For he merely asks that he
W-185.12. For you was peace created, given you by its Creator, and established as His Own eternal
W-185.13. No one can lose and everyone must gain whenever any gift of God has been requested
W-185.14. It is this one intent we seek today, uniting our desires with the need of every heart, the
W-186.1. Here is the statement that will one day take all arrogance away from every mind. 2 Here
W-186.2. Let us not fight our function. 2 We did not establish it. 3 It is not our idea. 4 The means
W-186.3. Today's idea may seem quite sobering, until you see its meaning. 2 All it says is that your
W-186.4. All false humility we lay aside today, that we may listen to God's Voice reveal to us what
W-186.5. There is one way, and only one, to be released from the imprisonment your plan to prove
W-186.6. Arrogance makes an image of yourself that is not real. 2 It is this image which quails and
W-186.7. All this the Voice for God relates to you. 2 And as He speaks, the image trembles and
W-186.8. And so we find our peace. 2 We will accept the function God has given us, for all
W-186.9. Is this the Son of God? 2 Could He create such instability and call it Son? 3 He Who is
W-186.10. These unsubstantial images will go, and leave your mind unclouded and serene, when
W-186.11. In lovely contrast, certain as the sun's return each morning to dispel the night, your truly
W-186.12. Do as God's Voice directs. 2 And if It asks a thing of you which seems impossible,
W-186.13. His gentle Voice is calling from the known to the unknowing. 2 He would comfort you,
W-186.14. These are the forms which never can deceive, because they come from Formlessness
W-187.1. No one can give unless he has. 2 In fact, giving is proof of having. 3 We have made this
W-187.2. How is this possible? 2 For it is sure that if you give a finite thing away, your body's eyes
W-187.3. Ideas must first belong to you, before you give them. 2 If you are to save the world, you
W-187.4. Protect all things you value by the act of giving them away, and you are sure that you will
W-187.5. Give gladly. 2 You can only gain thereby. 3 The thought remains, and grows in strength
W-187.6. Never forget you give but to yourself. 2 Who understands what giving means must laugh
W-187.7. Illusion recognized must disappear. 2 Accept not suffering, and you remove the thought of
W-187.8. Never believe that you can sacrifice. 2 There is no place for sacrifice in what has any
W-187.9. The lilies that your brother offers you are laid upon your altar, with the ones you offer
W-187.10. Now are we one in thought, for fear has gone. 2 And here, before the altar to one God,
W-187.11. Now are we blessed, and now we bless the world. 2 What we have looked upon we
W-188.1. Why wait for Heaven? 2 Those who seek the light are merely covering their eyes. 3 The
W-188.2. This light can not be lost. 2 Why wait to find it in the future, or believe it has been lost
W-188.3. The peace of God is shining in you now, and from your heart extends around the world. 2
W-188.4. The shining in your mind reminds the world of what it has forgotten, and the world
W-188.5. The peace of God can never be contained. 2 Who recognizes it within himself must give
W-188.6. Sit quietly and close your eyes. 2 The light within you is sufficient. 3 It alone has power
W-188.7. These thoughts you think with Him. 2 They recognize their home. 3 And they point surely
W-188.8. They heed your Father's Voice when you refuse to listen. 2 And they urge you gently to
W-188.9. We practice coming nearer to the light in us today. 2 We take our wandering thoughts,
W-188.10. Thus are our minds restored with them, and we acknowledge that the peace of God still
W-189.1. There is a light in you the world can not perceive. 2 And with its eyes you will not see
W-189.2. Who could feel fear in such a world as this? 2 It welcomes you, rejoices that you came,
W-189.3. This is the world the Love of God reveals. 2 It is so different from the world you see
W-189.4. Yet is the world of hatred equally unseen and inconceivable to those who feel God's Love
W-189.5. What would you see? 2 The choice is given you. 3 But learn and do not let your mind
W-189.6. Today we pass illusions, as we seek to reach to what is true in us, and feel its all
W-189.7. Simply do this: Be still, and lay aside all thoughts of what you are and what God is; all
W-189.8. Is it not He Who knows the way to you? 2 You need not know the way to Him. 3 Your
W-189.9. And so today we do not choose the way in which we go to Him. 2 But we do choose to let
W-189.10. Father, we do not know the way to You. 2 But we have called, and You have answered
W-190.1. Pain is a wrong perspective. 2 When it is experienced in any form, it is a proof of self-deception. 3 It is not a fact at all. 4 There is no form it takes that will not disappear if seen aright. 5
W-190.2. Can such projections be attested to? 2 Can they be anything but wholly false? 3 Pain is
W-190.3. Pain is a sign illusions reign in place of truth. 2 It demonstrates God is denied, confused
W-190.4. Peace to such foolishness! 2 The time has come to laugh at such insane ideas. 3 There is
W-190.5. It is your thoughts alone that cause you pain. 2 Nothing external to your mind can hurt or
W-190.6. My holy brother, think of this awhile: The world you see does nothing. 2 It has no effects
W-190.7. The world may seem to cause you pain. 2 And yet the world, as causeless, has no power
W-190.8. Pain is the thought of evil taking form, and working havoc in your holy mind. 2 Pain is
W-190.9. Lay down your arms, and come without defense into the quiet place where Heaven's peace
W-190.10. Here will you understand there is no pain. 2 Here does the joy of God belong to you. 3
W-190.11. And so again we make the only choice that ever can be made; we choose between
W-191.1. Here is your declaration of release from bondage of the world. 2 And here as well is all
W-191.2. What have you done that this should be your world? 2 What have you done that this is
W-191.3. Deny your own Identity, and you will not escape the madness which induced this weird,
W-191.4. Yet what is it except a game you play in which Identity can be denied? 2 You are as God
W-191.5. But let today's idea find a place among your thoughts and you have risen far above the
W-191.6. One holy thought like this and you are free: You are the holy Son of God Himself. 2 And
W-191.7. Be glad today how very easily is hell undone. 2 You need but tell yourself:
W-191.8. A miracle has lighted up all dark and ancient caverns, where the rites of death echoed
W-191.9. You who perceive yourself as weak and frail, with futile hopes and devastated dreams,
W-191.10. Then let the Son of God awaken from his sleep, and opening his holy eyes, return again
W-191.11. They must await your own release. 2 They stay in chains till you are free. 3 They cannot
W-192.1. It is your Father's holy Will that you complete Himself, and that your Self shall be His
W-192.2. Therefore, you have a function in the world in its own terms. 2 For who can understand a
W-192.3. Creation cannot even be conceived of in the world. 2 It has no meaning here. 3
W-192.4. Forgiveness gently looks upon all things unknown in Heaven, sees them disappear, and
W-192.5. The mind without the body cannot make mistakes. 2 It cannot think that it will die, nor be
W-192.6. With anger gone, you will indeed perceive that, for Christ's vision and the gift of sight, no
W-192.7. Yet do we need forgiveness to perceive that this is so. 2 Without its kindly light we grope
W-192.8. Who can be born again in Christ but him who has forgiven everyone he sees or thinks of
W-192.9. Therefore, hold no one prisoner. 2 Release instead of bind, for thus are you made free. 3
W-192.10. Be merciful today. 2 The Son of God deserves your mercy. 3 It is he who asks that you
W-193.1. God does not know of learning. 2 Yet His Will extends to what He does not understand,
W-193.2. God sees no contradictions. 2 Yet His Son believes he sees them. 3 Thus he has a need for
W-193.3. These are the lessons God would have you learn. 2 His Will reflects them all, and they
W-193.4. Certain it is that all distress does not appear to be but unforgiveness. 2 Yet that is the
W-193.5. Forgive, and you will see this differently.
W-193.6. Shall we not learn to say these words when we are tempted to believe that pain is real, and
W-193.7. How can you tell when you are seeing wrong, or someone else is failing to perceive the
W-193.8. God would not have you suffer thus. 2 He would help you forgive yourself. 3 His Son
W-193.9. All things are lessons God would have you learn. 2 He would not leave an unforgiving
W-193.10. We will attempt today to overcome a thousand seeming obstacles to peace in just one
W-193.11. Give all you can, and give a little more. 2 For now we would arise in haste and go unto
W-193.12. Each hour, spend a little time today, and in the days to come, in practicing the lesson in
W-193.13. This is the lesson God would have you learn: There is a way to look on everything that
W-194.1. Today's idea takes another step toward quick salvation, and a giant stride it is indeed! 2 So
W-194.2. Accept today's idea, and you have passed all anxiety, all pits of hell, all blackness of
W-194.3. In no one instant is depression felt, or pain experienced or loss perceived. 2 In no one
W-194.4. God holds your future as He holds your past and present. 2 They are one to Him, and so
W-194.5. Release the future. 2 For the past is gone, and what is present, freed from its bequest of
W-194.6. If you can see the lesson for today as the deliverance it really is, you will not hesitate to
W-194.7. What worry can beset the one who gives his future to the loving Hands of God? 2 What
W-194.8. Place, then, your future in the Hands of God. 2 For thus you call the memory of Him to
W-194.9. Now are we saved indeed. 2 For in God's Hands we rest untroubled, sure that only good
W-195.1. Gratitude is a lesson hard to learn for those who look upon the world amiss. 2 The most
W-195.2. It is insane to offer thanks because of suffering. 2 But it is equally insane to fail in
W-195.3. Your brother is your "enemy" because you see in him the rival for your peace; a plunderer
W-195.4. You do not offer God your gratitude because your brother is more slave than you, nor
W-195.5. Therefore give thanks, but in sincerity. 2 And let your gratitude make room for all who
W-195.6. We thank our Father for one thing alone; that we are separate from no living thing, and
W-195.7. Then let our brothers lean their tired heads against our shoulders as they rest a while. 2
W-195.8. Walk, then, in gratitude the way of love. 2 For hatred is forgotten when we lay
W-195.9. Today we learn to think of gratitude in place of anger, malice and revenge. 2 We have
W-195.10. Our gratitude will pave the way to Him, and shorten our learning time by more than you
W-196.1. When this is firmly understood and kept in full awareness, you will not attempt to harm
W-196.2. Perhaps at first you will not understand how mercy, limitless and with all things held in
W-196.3. Thus do you also teach your mind that you are not an ego. 2 For the ways in which the
W-196.4. Today's idea is one step we take in leading us from bondage to the state of perfect
W-196.5. The dreary, hopeless thought that you can make attacks on others and escape yourself has
W-196.6. Such is the form of madness you believe, if you accept the fearful thought you can attack
W-196.7. To question it at all, its form must first be changed at least as much as will permit fear of
W-196.8. Our next steps will be easy, if you take this one today. 2 From there we go ahead quite
W-196.9. Salvation's song can certainly be heard in the idea we practice for today. 2 If it can but be
W-196.10. There is an instant in which terror seems to grip your mind so wholly that escape
W-196.11. Now, for an instant, is a murderer perceived within you, eager for your death, intent on
W-196.12. There is no Thought of God that does not go with you to help you reach that instant, and
W-197.1. Here is the second step we take to free your mind from the belief in outside force pitted
W-197.2. How easily are God and guilt confused by those who know not what their thoughts can
W-197.3. The world must thank you when you offer it release from your illusions. 2 Yet your
W-197.4. It does not matter if another thinks your gifts unworthy. 2 In his mind there is a part that
W-197.5. God blesses every gift you give to Him, and every gift is given Him, because it can be
W-197.6. Withdraw the gifts you give, and you will think that what is given you has been
W-197.7. And with the end of this belief is fear forever over. 2 Thank your Self for this, for He is
W-197.8. Thanks be to you, the holy Son of God. 2 For as you were created, you contain all things
W-197.9. Give thanks as you receive it. 2 Be you free of all ingratitude to anyone who makes your
W-198.1. Injury is impossible. 2 And yet illusion makes illusion. 3 If you can condemn, you can be
W-198.2. Condemn and you are made a prisoner. 2 Forgive and you are freed. 3 Such is the law that
W-198.3. Forgiveness sweeps all other dreams away, and though it is itself a dream, it breeds no
W-198.4. Forgiveness is the only road that leads out of disaster, past all suffering, and finally away
W-198.5. Is it not wiser to be glad you hold the answer to your problems in your hand? 2 Is it not
W-198.6. His words will work. 2 His words will save. 3 His words contain all hope, all blessing and
W-198.7. This world has many seeming separate haunts where mercy has no meaning, and attack
W-198.8. The stillness of your Self remains unmoved, untouched by thoughts like these, and
W-198.9. Today we practice letting freedom come to make its home with you. 2 The truth bestows
W-198.10. Accept the one illusion which proclaims there is no condemnation in God's Son, and
W-198.11. Now is there silence all around the world. 2 Now is there stillness where before there
W-198.12. There is no condemnation in him. 2 He is perfect in his holiness. 3 He needs no thoughts
W-198.13. Today we come still nearer to the end of everything that yet would stand between this
W-199.1. Freedom must be impossible as long as you perceive a body as yourself. 2 The body is a
W-199.2. The mind that serves the Holy Spirit is unlimited forever, in all ways, beyond the laws of
W-199.3. It is essential for your progress in this course that you accept today's idea, and hold it very
W-199.4. Here does it hide, and here it can be seen as what it is. 2 Declare your innocence and you
W-199.5. Cherish today's idea, and practice it today and every day. 2 Make it a part of every
W-199.6. The Holy Spirit is the home of minds that seek for freedom. 2 In Him they have found
W-199.7. Be free today. 2 And carry freedom as your gift to those who still believe they are
W-199.8. You are God's Son. 2 In immortality you live forever. 3 Would you not return your mind
W-200.1. Seek you no further. 2 You will not find peace except the peace of God. 3 Accept this
W-200.2. This is the final point to which each one must come at last, to lay aside all hope of
W-200.3. Yet you can ask as easily for love, for happiness, and for eternal life in peace that has no
W-200.4. Come home. 2 You have not found your happiness in foreign places and in alien forms
W-200.5. Freedom is given you where you beheld but chains and iron doors. 2 But you must change
W-200.6. What does forgiveness do? 2 In truth it has no function, and does nothing. 3 For it is
W-200.7. There is no peace except the peace of God, because He has one Son who cannot make a
W-200.8. Peace is the bridge that everyone will cross, to leave this world behind. 2 But peace
W-200.9. Let us not lose our way again today. 2 We go to Heaven, and the path is straight. 3 Only if
W-200.10. Now is there silence. 2 Seek no further. 3 You have come to where the road is carpeted
W-200.11. Today we seek no idols. 2 Peace can not be found in them. 3 The peace of God is ours,
W-rVI.in.1. For this review we take but one idea each day, and practice it as often as is possible. 2
W-rVI.in.2. With this in mind we start our practicing, in which we carefully review the thoughts the
W-rVI.in.3. These practice sessions, like our last review, are centered round a central theme with
W-rVI.in.4. We will attempt to get beyond all words and special forms of practicing for this review.
W-rVI.in.5. There is but one exception to this lack of structuring. 2 Permit no idle thought to go
W-rVI.in.6. When you are tempted, hasten to proclaim your freedom from temptation, as you say:
W-rVI.in.7. To Him I offer this review for you. 2 I place you in His charge, and let Him teach you
W-201.1. (181) I trust my brothers, who are one with me.
W-202.1. (182) I will be still an instant and go home.
W-203.1. (183) I call upon God's Name and on my own.
W-204.1. (184) The Name of God is my inheritance.
W-205.1. (185) I want the peace of God.
W-206.1. (186) Salvation of the world depends on me.
W-207.1. (187) I bless the world because I bless myself.
W-208.1. (188) The peace of God is shining in me now.
W-209.1. (189) I feel the Love of God within me now.
W-210.1. (190) I choose the joy of God instead of pain.
W-211.1. (191) I am the holy Son of God Himself.
W-212.1. (192) I have a function God would have me fill.
W-213.1. (193) All things are lessons God would have me learn.
W-214.1. (194) I place the future in the Hands of God.
W-215.1. (195) Love is the way I walk in gratitude.
W-216.1. (196) It can be but myself I crucify.
W-217.1. (197) It can be but my gratitude I earn.
W-218.1. (198) Only my condemnation injures me.
W-219.1. (199) I am not a body. 2 I am free.
W-220.1. (200) There is no peace except the peace of God.
W-pII.in.1. Words will mean little now. 2 We use them but as guides on which we do not now
W-pII.in.2. Now we attempt to let the exercise be merely a beginning. 2 For we wait in quiet
W-pII.in.3. We will continue with a central thought for all the days to come, and we will use that
W-pII.in.4. Now do we come to Him with but His Word upon our minds and hearts, and wait for
W-pII.in.5. Now is the time of prophecy fulfilled. 2 Now are all ancient promises upheld and fully
W-pII.in.6. I am so close to you we cannot fail. 2 Father, we give these holy times to You, in
W-pII.in.7. And now we wait in silence, unafraid and certain of Your coming. 2 We have sought to
W-pII.in.8. And so we start upon the final part of this one holy year, which we have spent together
W-pII.in.9. We had a wish that God would fail to have the Son whom He created for Himself. 2 We
W-pII.in.10. Now is the need for practice almost done. 2 For in this final section, we will come to
W-pII.in.11. One further use for words we still retain. 2 From time to time, instructions on a theme
W-pII.1.1. Forgiveness recognizes what you thought your brother did to you has not occurred. 2 It
W-pII.1.2. An unforgiving thought is one which makes a judgment that it will not raise to doubt,
W-pII.1.3. An unforgiving thought does many things. 2 In frantic action it pursues its goal, twisting
W-pII.1.4. Forgiveness, on the other hand, is still, and quietly does nothing. 2 It offends no aspect of
W-pII.1.5. Do nothing, then, and let forgiveness show you what to do, through Him Who is your
W-221.1. Father, I come to You today to seek the peace that You alone can give. 2 I come in
W-221.2. Now do we wait in quiet. 2 God is here, because we wait together. 3 I am sure that He
W-222.1. God is with me. 2 He is my Source of life, the life within, the air I breathe, the food by
W-222.2. Father, we have no words except Your Name upon our lips and in our minds, as we come
W-223.1. I was mistaken when I thought I lived apart from God, a separate entity that moved in
W-223.2. Our Father, let us see the face of Christ instead of our mistakes. 2 For we who are Your
W-224.1. My true Identity is so secure, so lofty, sinless, glorious and great, wholly beneficent and
W-224.2. My Name, O Father, still is known to You. 2 I have forgotten It, and do not know where I
W-225.1. Father, I must return Your Love for me, for giving and receiving are the same, and You
W-225.2. Brother, we find that stillness now. 2 The way is open. 3 Now we follow it in peace
W-226.1. If I so choose, I can depart this world entirely. 2 It is not death which makes this possible,
W-226.2. Father, my home awaits my glad return. 2 Your Arms are open and I hear Your Voice. 3
W-227.1. Father, it is today that I am free, because my will is Yours. 2 I thought to make another
W-227.2. And so today we find our glad return to Heaven, which we never really left. 2 The Son of
W-228.1. My Father knows my holiness. 2 Shall I deny His knowledge, and believe in what His
W-228.2. Father, I was mistaken in myself, because I failed to realize the Source from which I
W-229.1. I seek my own Identity, and find It in these words: "Love, which created me, is what I
W-229.2. Father, my thanks to You for what I am; for keeping my Identity untouched and sinless, in
W-230.1. In peace I was created. 2 And in peace do I remain. 3 It is not given me to change my
W-230.2. Father, I seek the peace You gave as mine in my creation. 2 What was given then must be
W-pII.2.1. Salvation is a promise, made by God, that you would find your way to Him at last. 2 It
W-pII.2.2. The Thought of peace was given to God's Son the instant that his mind had thought of
W-pII.2.3. Salvation is undoing in the sense that it does nothing, failing to support the world of
W-pII.2.4. Let us come daily to this holy place, and spend a while together. 2 Here we share our
W-pII.2.5. From here we give salvation to the world, for it is here salvation was received. 2 The
W-231.1. What can I seek for, Father, but Your Love? 2 Perhaps I think I seek for something else; a
W-231.2. This is your will, my brother. 2 And you share this will with me, and with the One as well
W-232.1. Be in my mind, my Father, when I wake, and shine on me throughout the day today. 2 Let
W-232.2. This is as every day should be. 2 Today, practice the end of fear. 3 Have faith in Him
W-233.1. Father, I give You all my thoughts today. 2 I would have none of mine. 3 In place of them,
W-233.2. Today we have one Guide to lead us on. 2 And as we walk together, we will give this day
W-234.1. Today we will anticipate the time when dreams of sin and guilt are gone, and we have
W-234.2. We thank You, Father, that we cannot lose the memory of You and of Your Love. 2 We
W-235.1. I need but look upon all things that seem to hurt me, and with perfect certainty assure
W-235.2. Father, Your Holiness is mine. 2 Your Love created me, and made my sinlessness forever
W-236.1. I have a kingdom I must rule. 2 At times, it does not seem I am its king at all. 3 It seems
W-236.2. Father, my mind is open to Your Thoughts, and closed today to every thought but Yours. 2
W-237.1. Today I will accept the truth about myself. 2 I will arise in glory, and allow the light in
W-237.2. Christ is my eyes today, and He the ears that listen to the Voice for God today. 2 Father, I
W-238.1. Father, Your trust in me has been so great, I must be worthy. 2 You created me, and know
W-238.2. And so, again today, we pause to think how much our Father loves us. 2 And how dear
W-239.1. Let not the truth about ourselves today be hidden by a false humility. 2 Let us instead be
W-239.2. We thank You, Father, for the light that shines forever in us. 2 And we honor it, because
W-240.1. Fear is deception. 2 It attests that you have seen yourself as you could never be, and
W-240.2. How foolish are our fears! 2 Would You allow Your Son to suffer? 3 Give us faith today
W-pII.3.1. The world is false perception. 2 It is born of error, and it has not left its source. 3 It will
W-pII.3.2. The world was made as an attack on God. 2 It symbolizes fear. 3 And what is fear except
W-pII.3.3. The mechanisms of illusion have been born instead. 2 And now they go to find what has
W-pII.3.4. As sight was made to lead away from truth, it can be redirected. 2 Sounds become the
W-pII.3.5. Let us not rest content until the world has joined our changed perception. 2 Let us not be
W-241.1. What joy there is today! 2 It is a time of special celebration. 3 For today holds out the
W-241.2. We have forgiven one another now, and so we come at last to You again. 2 Father, Your
W-242.1. I will not lead my life alone today. 2 I do not understand the world, and so to try to lead
W-242.2. And so we give today to You. 2 We come with wholly open minds. 3 We do not ask for
W-243.1. I will be honest with myself today. 2 I will not think that I already know what must
W-243.2. Father, today I leave creation free to be itself. 2 I honor all its parts, in which I am
W-244.1. Your Son is safe wherever he may be, for You are there with him. 2 He need but call upon
W-244.2. And there we are in truth. 2 No storms can come into the hallowed haven of our home. 3
W-245.1. Your peace surrounds me, Father. 2 Where I go, Your peace goes there with me. 3 It
W-245.2. And so we go in peace. 2 To all the world we give the message that we have received. 3
W-246.1. Let me not think that I can find the way to God, if I have hatred in my heart. 2 Let me not
W-246.2. I will accept the way You choose for me to come to You, my Father. 2 For in that will I
W-247.1. Sin is the symbol of attack. 2 Behold it anywhere, and I will suffer. 3 For forgiveness is
W-247.2. So would I look on everyone today. 2 My brothers are Your Sons. 3 Your Fatherhood
W-248.1. I have disowned the truth. 2 Now let me be as faithful in disowning falsity. 3 Whatever
W-248.2. Father, my ancient love for You returns, and lets me love Your Son again as well. 2
W-249.1. Forgiveness paints a picture of a world where suffering is over, loss becomes impossible
W-249.2. Father, we would return our minds to You. 2 We have betrayed them, held them in a vise
W-250.1. Let me behold the Son of God today, and witness to his glory. 2 Let me not try to obscure
W-250.2. He is Your Son, my Father. 2 And today I would behold his gentleness instead of my
W-pII.4.1. Sin is insanity. 2 It is the means by which the mind is driven mad, and seeks to let
W-pII.4.2. The body is the instrument the mind made in its efforts to deceive itself. 2 Its purpose is
W-pII.4.3. Sin is the home of all illusions, which but stand for things imagined, issuing from
W-pII.4.4. A madman's dreams are frightening, and sin appears indeed to terrify. 2 And yet what sin
W-pII.4.5. How long, O Son of God, will you maintain the game of sin? 2 Shall we not put away
W-251.1. I sought for many things, and found despair. 2 Now do I seek but one, for in that one is
W-251.2. And for that peace, our Father, we give thanks. 2 What we denied ourselves You have
W-252.1. My Self is holy beyond all the thoughts of holiness of which I now conceive. 2 Its
W-252.2. Father, You know my true Identity. 2 Reveal It now to me who am Your Son, that I may
W-253.1. It is impossible that anything should come to me unbidden by myself. 2 Even in this
W-253.2. You are the Self Whom You created Son, creating like Yourself and One with You. 2 My
W-254.1. Father, today I would but hear Your Voice. 2 In deepest silence I would come to You, to
W-254.2. Today we let no ego thoughts direct our words or actions. 2 When such thoughts occur,
W-255.1. It does not seem to me that I can choose to have but peace today. 2 And yet, my God
W-255.2. And so, my Father, would I pass this day with You. 2 Your Son has not forgotten You. 3
W-256.1. The way to God is through forgiveness here. 2 There is no other way. 3 If sin had not
W-256.2. And so, our Father, would we come to You in Your appointed way. 2 We have no goal
W-257.1. If I forget my goal I can be but confused, unsure of what I am, and thus conflicted in my
W-257.2. Father, forgiveness is Your chosen means for our salvation. 2 Let us not forget today that
W-258.1. All that is needful is to train our minds to overlook all little senseless aims, and to
W-258.2. Our goal is but to follow in the way that leads to You. 2 We have no goal but this. 3 What
W-259.1. Sin is the only thought that makes the goal of God seem unattainable. 2 What else could
W-259.2. Father, I would not be insane today. 2 I would not be afraid of love, nor seek for refuge
W-260.1. Father, I did not make myself, although in my insanity I thought I did. 2 Yet, as Your
W-260.2. Now is our Source remembered, and Therein we find our true Identity at last. 2 Holy
W-pII.5.1. The body is a fence the Son of God imagines he has built, to separate parts of his Self
W-pII.5.2. The body will not stay. 2 Yet this he sees as double safety. 3 For the Son of God's
W-pII.5.3. The body is a dream. 2 Like other dreams it sometimes seems to picture happiness, but
W-pII.5.4. The body is the means by which God's Son returns to sanity. 2 Though it was made to
W-pII.5.5. You will identify with what you think will make you safe. 2 Whatever it may be, you
W-261.1. I will identify with what I think is refuge and security. 2 I will behold myself where I
W-261.2. Let me not seek for idols. 2 I would come, my Father, home to You today. 3 I choose to be
W-262.1. Father, You have one Son. 2 And it is he that I would look upon today. 3 He is Your one
W-262.2. We who are one would recognize this day the truth about ourselves. 2 We would come
W-263.1. Father, Your Mind created all that is, Your Spirit entered into it, Your Love gave life to it.
W-263.2. And while we still remain outside the gate of Heaven, let us look on all we see through
W-264.1. Father, You stand before me and behind, beside me, in the place I see myself, and
W-264.2. My brothers, join with me in this today. 2 This is salvation's prayer. 3 Must we not join in
W-265.1. I have indeed misunderstood the world, because I laid my sins on it and saw them looking
W-265.2. In quiet would I look upon the world, which but reflects Your Thoughts, and mine as well.
W-266.1. Father, You gave me all Your Sons, to be my saviors and my counselors in sight; the
W-266.2. This day we enter into Paradise, calling upon God's Name and on our own,
W-267.1. Surrounding me is all the life that God created in His Love. 2 It calls to me in every
W-267.2. Let me attend Your Answer, not my own. 2 Father, my heart is beating in the peace the
W-268.1. Let me not be Your critic, Lord, today, and judge against You. 2 Let me not attempt to
W-268.2. Let not our sight be blasphemous today, nor let our ears attend to lying tongues. 2 Only
W-269.1. I ask Your blessing on my sight today. 2 It is the means which You have chosen to become
W-269.2. Today our sight is blessed indeed. 2 We share one vision, as we look upon the face of
W-270.1. Father, Christ's vision is Your gift to me, and it has power to translate all that the body's
W-270.2. The quiet of today will bless our hearts, and through them peace will come to everyone. 2
W-pII.6.1. Christ is God's Son as He created Him. 2 He is the Self we share, uniting us with one
W-pII.6.2. Christ is the link that keeps you one with God, and guarantees that separation is no more
W-pII.6.3. Home of the Holy Spirit, and at home in God alone, does Christ remain at peace within
W-pII.6.4. The Holy Spirit reaches from the Christ in you to all your dreams, and bids them come to
W-pII.6.5. And how long will this holy face be seen, when it is but the symbol that the time for
W-271.1. Each day, each hour, every instant, I am choosing what I want to look upon, the sounds I
W-271.2. Father, Christ's vision is the way to You. 2 What He beholds invites Your memory to be
W-272.1. Father, the truth belongs to me. 2 My home is set in Heaven by Your Will and mine. 3
W-272.2. Today we pass illusions by. 2 And if we hear temptation call to us to stay and linger in a
W-273.1. Perhaps we are now ready for a day of undisturbed tranquility. 2 If this is not yet feasible,
W-273.2. Father, Your peace is mine. 2 What need have I to fear that anything can rob me of what
W-274.1. Father, today I would let all things be as You created them, and give Your Son the honor
W-274.2. A special blessing comes to us today, from Him Who is our Father. 2 Give this day to
W-275.1. Let us today attend the Voice for God, which speaks an ancient lesson, no more true
W-275.2. Your healing Voice protects all things today, and so I leave all things to You. 2 I need be
W-276.1. What is the Word of God? 2 "My Son is pure and holy as Myself." 3 And thus did God
W-276.2. Father, Your Word is mine. 2 And it is this that I would speak to all my brothers, who are
W-277.1. Your Son is free, my Father. 2 Let me not imagine I have bound him with the laws I made
W-277.2. Let us not worship idols, nor believe in any law idolatry would make to hide the freedom
W-278.1. If I accept that I am prisoner within a body, in a world in which all things that seem to
W-278.2. Father, I ask for nothing but the truth. 2 I have had many foolish thoughts about myself
W-279.1. The end of dreams is promised me, because God's Son is not abandoned by His Love. 2
W-279.2. I will accept Your promises today, and give my faith to them. 2 My Father loves the Son
W-280.1. Whom God created limitless is free. 2 I can invent imprisonment for him, but only in
W-280.2. Today let me give honor to Your Son, for thus alone I find the way to You. 2 Father, I lay
W-pII.7.1. The Holy Spirit mediates between illusions and the truth. 2 Since He must bridge the gap
W-pII.7.2. The goal the Holy Spirit's teaching sets is just this end of dreams. 2 For sights and
W-pII.7.3. If you but knew how much your Father yearns to have you recognize your sinlessness,
W-pII.7.4. From knowledge, where He has been placed by God, the Holy Spirit calls to you, to let
W-pII.7.5. Accept your Father's gift. 2 It is a Call from Love to Love, that It be but Itself. 3 The
W-281.1. Father, Your Son is perfect. 2 When I think that I am hurt in any way, it is because I have
W-281.2. I will not hurt myself today. 2 For I am far beyond all pain. 3 My Father placed me safe in
W-282.1. If I could realize but this today, salvation would be reached for all the world. 2 This the
W-282.2. Father, Your Name is Love and so is mine. 2 Such is the truth. 3 And can the truth be
W-283.1. Father, I made an image of myself, and it is this I call the Son of God. 2 Yet is creation as
W-283.2. Now are we One in shared Identity, with God our Father as our only Source, and
W-284.1. Loss is not loss when properly perceived. 2 Pain is impossible. 3 There is no grief with
W-284.2. Father, what You have given cannot hurt, so grief and pain must be impossible. 2 Let me
W-285.1. Today I wake with joy, expecting but the happy things of God to come to me. 2 I ask but
W-285.2. Father, my holiness is Yours. 2 Let me rejoice in it, and through forgiveness be restored
W-286.1. Father, how still today! 2 How quietly do all things fall in place! 3 This is the day that
W-286.2. The stillness of today will give us hope that we have found the way, and travelled far
W-287.1. Where would I go but Heaven? 2 What could be a substitute for happiness? 3 What gift
W-287.2. You are my goal, my Father. 2 What but You could I desire to have? 3 What way but that
W-288.1. This is the thought that leads the way to You, and brings me to my goal. 2 I cannot come
W-288.2. Forgive me, then, today. 2 And you will know you have forgiven me if you behold your
W-289.1. Unless the past is over in my mind, the real world must escape my sight. 2 For I am really
W-289.2. Father, let me not look upon a past that is not there. 2 For You have offered me Your Own
W-290.1. Unless I look upon what is not there, my present happiness is all I see. 2 Eyes that begin
W-290.2. With this resolve I come to You, and ask Your strength to hold me up today, while I but
W-pII.8.1. The real world is a symbol, like the rest of what perception offers. 2 Yet it stands for
W-pII.8.2. The real world holds a counterpart for each unhappy thought reflected in your world; a
W-pII.8.3. What need has such a mind for thoughts of death, attack and murder? 2 What can it
W-pII.8.4. The real world is the symbol that the dream of sin and guilt is over, and God's Son no
W-pII.8.5. The Holy Spirit has no need of time when it has served His purpose. 2 Now He waits but
W-291.1. Christ's vision looks through me today. 2 His sight shows me all things forgiven and at
W-291.2. This day my mind is quiet, to receive the Thoughts You offer me. 2 And I accept what
W-292.1. God's promises make no exceptions. 2 And He guarantees that only joy can be the final
W-292.2. We thank You, Father, for Your guarantee of only happy outcomes in the end. 2 Help us
W-293.1. All fear is past, because its source is gone, and all its thoughts gone with it. 2 Love
W-293.2. Father, let not Your holy world escape my sight today. 2 Nor let my ears be deaf to all the
W-294.1. I am a Son of God. 2 And can I be another thing as well? 3 Did God create the mortal and
W-294.2. My body, Father, cannot be Your Son. 2 And what is not created cannot be sinful nor
W-295.1. Christ asks that He may use my eyes today, and thus redeem the world. 2 He asks this gift
W-295.2. My Father, Christ has asked a gift of me, and one I give that it be given me. 2 Help me to
W-296.1. The Holy Spirit needs my voice today, that all the world may listen to Your Voice, and
W-296.2. We teach today what we would learn, and that alone. 2 And so our learning goal becomes
W-297.1. Forgiveness is the only gift I give, because it is the only gift I want. 2 And everything I
W-297.2. Father, how certain are Your ways; how sure their final outcome, and how faithfully is
W-298.1. My gratitude permits my love to be accepted without fear. 2 And thus am I restored to my
W-298.2. Father, I come to You today, because I would not follow any way but Yours. 2 You are
W-299.1. My holiness is far beyond my own ability to understand or know. 2 Yet God, my Father,
W-299.2. Father, my holiness is not of me. 2 It is not mine to be destroyed by sin. 3 It is not mine to
W-300.1. This is a thought which can be used to say that death and sorrow are the certain lot of all
W-300.2. We seek Your holy world today. 2 For we, Your loving Sons, have lost our way a while. 3
W-pII.9.1. Christ's Second Coming, which is sure as God, is merely the correction of mistakes, and
W-pII.9.2. It is the all-inclusive nature of Christ's Second Coming that permits it to embrace the
W-pII.9.3. The Second Coming ends the lessons that the Holy Spirit teaches, making way for the
W-pII.9.4. The Second Coming is the one event in time which time itself can not affect. 2 For every
W-pII.9.5. Pray that the Second Coming will be soon, but do not rest with that. 2 It needs your eyes
W-301.1. Father, unless I judge I cannot weep. 2 Nor can I suffer pain, or feel I am abandoned or
W-301.2. God's world is happy. 2 Those who look on it can only add their joy to it, and bless it as a
W-302.1. Father, our eyes are opening at last. 2 Your holy world awaits us, as our sight is finally
W-302.2. Our Love awaits us as we go to Him, and walks beside us showing us the way. 2 He fails
W-303.1. Watch with me, angels, watch with me today. 2 Let all God's holy Thoughts surround me,
W-303.2. Your Son is welcome, Father. 2 He has come to save me from the evil self I made. 3 He is
W-304.1. I can obscure my holy sight, if I intrude my world upon it. 2 Nor can I behold the holy
W-304.2. You lead me from the darkness to the light; from sin to holiness. 2 Let me forgive, and
W-305.1. Who uses but Christ's vision finds a peace so deep and quiet, undisturbable and wholly
W-305.2. Father, the peace of Christ is given us, because it is Your Will that we be saved. 2 Help
W-306.1. What but Christ's vision would I use today, when it can offer me a day in which I see a
W-306.2. And so, our Father, we return to You, remembering we never went away; remembering
W-307.1. Father, Your Will is mine, and only that. 2 There is no other will for me to have. 3 Let me
W-307.2. And with this prayer we enter silently into a state where conflict cannot come, because we
W-308.1. I have conceived of time in such a way that I defeat my aim. 2 If I elect to reach past time
W-308.2. Thanks for this instant, Father. 2 It is now I am redeemed. 3 This instant is the time You
W-309.1. Within me is eternal innocence, because it is God's Will that it be there forever and
W-309.2. The step I take today, my Father, is my sure release from idle dreams of sin. 2 Your altar
W-310.1. This day, my Father, would I spend with You, as You have chosen all my days should be.
W-310.2. We spend this day together, you and I. 2 And all the world joins with us in our song of
W-pII.10.1. Christ's Second Coming gives the Son of God this gift: to hear the Voice for God
W-pII.10.2. The final judgment on the world contains no condemnation. 2 For it sees the world as
W-pII.10.3. You who believed that God's Last Judgment would condemn the world to hell along
W-pII.10.4. God's Final Judgment is as merciful as every step in His appointed plan to bless His
W-pII.10.5. This is God's Final Judgment: "You are still My holy Son, forever innocent, forever
W-311.1. Judgment was made to be a weapon used against the truth. 2 It separates what it is being
W-311.2. Father, we wait with open mind today, to hear Your Judgment of the Son You love. 2 We
W-312.1. Perception follows judgment. 2 Having judged, we therefore see what we would look
W-312.2. I have no purpose for today except to look upon a liberated world, set free from all the
W-313.1. Father, there is a vision which beholds all things as sinless, so that fear has gone, and
W-313.2. Let us today behold each other in the sight of Christ. 2 How beautiful we are! 3 How holy
W-314.1. From new perception of the world there comes a future very different from the past. 2 The
W-314.2. Father, we were mistaken in the past, and choose to use the present to be free. 2 Now do
W-315.1. Each day a thousand treasures come to me with every passing moment. 2 I am blessed
W-315.2. I thank You, Father, for the many gifts that come to me today and every day from every
W-316.1. As every gift my brothers give is mine, so every gift I give belongs to me. 2 Each one
W-316.2. Father, I would accept Your gifts today. 2 I do not recognize them. 3 Yet I trust that You
W-317.1. I have a special place to fill; a role for me alone. 2 Salvation waits until I take this part as
W-317.2. Father, Your way is what I choose today. 2 Where it would lead me do I choose to go;
W-318.1. In me, God's holy Son, are reconciled all parts of Heaven's plan to save the world. 2 What
W-318.2. Let me today, my Father, take the role You offer me in Your request that I accept
W-319.1. Here is a thought from which all arrogance has been removed, and only truth remains. 2
W-319.2. Father, Your Will is total. 2 And the goal which stems from it shares its totality. 3 What
W-320.1. The Son of God is limitless. 2 There are no limits on his strength, his peace, his joy, nor
W-320.2. Your Will can do all things in me, and then extend to all the world as well through me. 2
W-pII.11.1. Creation is the sum of all God's Thoughts, in number infinite, and everywhere without
W-pII.11.2. God's Thoughts are given all the power that their own Creator has. 2 For He would add
W-pII.11.3. Creation is the opposite of all illusions, for creation is the truth. 2 Creation is the holy
W-pII.11.4. We are creation; we the Sons of God. 2 We seem to be discrete, and unaware of our
W-pII.11.5. Our Father calls to us. 2 We hear His Voice, and we forgive creation in the Name of its
W-321.1. I did not understand what made me free, nor what my freedom is, nor where to look to
W-321.2. Today we answer for the world, which will be freed along with us. 2 How glad are we to
W-322.1. I sacrifice illusions; nothing more. 2 And as illusions go I find the gifts illusions tried to
W-322.2. Father, to You all sacrifice remains forever inconceivable. 2 And so I cannot sacrifice
W-323.1. Here is the only "sacrifice" You ask of Your beloved Son; You ask him to give up all
W-323.2. And as we pay the debt we owe to truth,--a debt that merely is the letting go of self-deceptions and of images we worshipped falsely--truth returns to us in wholeness and in joy. 2 We
W-324.1. Father, You are the One Who gave the plan for my salvation to me. 2 You have set the
W-324.2. So let us follow One Who knows the way. 2 We need not tarry, and we cannot stray
W-325.1. This is salvation's keynote: What I see reflects a process in my mind, which starts with
W-325.2. Our Father, Your ideas reflect the truth, and mine apart from Yours but make up dreams.
W-326.1. Father, I was created in Your Mind, a holy Thought that never left its home. 2 I am
W-326.2. Let us today behold earth disappear, at first transformed, and then, forgiven, fade entirely
W-327.1. I am not asked to take salvation on the basis of an unsupported faith. 2 For God has
W-327.2. Father, I thank You that Your promises will never fail in my experience, if I but test them
W-328.1. What seems to be the second place is first, for all things we perceive are upside down
W-328.2. There is no will but Yours. 2 And I am glad that nothing I imagine contradicts what You
W-329.1. Father, I thought I wandered from Your Will, defied it, broke its laws, and interposed a
W-329.2. Today we will accept our union with each other and our Source. 2 We have no will apart
W-330.1. Let us this day accept forgiveness as our only function. 2 Why should we attack our
W-330.2. Father, Your Son can not be hurt. 2 And if we think we suffer, we but fail to know our one
W-pII.12.1. The ego is idolatry; the sign of limited and separated self, born in a body, doomed to
W-pII.12.2. The ego is insane. 2 In fear it stands beyond the Everywhere, apart from All, in
W-pII.12.3. The Son of God is egoless. 2 What can he know of madness and the death of God,
W-pII.12.4. To know reality is not to see the ego and its thoughts, its works, its acts, its laws and
W-pII.12.5. Yet will one lily of forgiveness change the darkness into light; the altar to illusions to
W-331.1. How foolish, Father, to believe Your Son could cause himself to suffer! 2 Could he make
W-331.2. Forgiveness shows us that God's Will is One, and that we share it. 2 Let us look upon the
W-332.1. The ego makes illusions. 2 Truth undoes its evil dreams by shining them away. 3 Truth
W-332.2. We would not bind the world again today. 2 Fear holds it prisoner. 3 And yet Your Love
W-333.1. Conflict must be resolved. 2 It cannot be evaded, set aside, denied, disguised, seen
W-333.2. Father, forgiveness is the light You chose to shine away all conflict and all doubt, and
W-334.1. I will not wait another day to find the treasures that my Father offers me. 2 Illusions are
W-334.2. I seek but the eternal. 2 For Your Son can be content with nothing less than this. 3 What,
W-335.1. Forgiveness is a choice. 2 I never see my brother as he is, for that is far beyond
W-335.2. What could restore Your memory to me, except to see my brother's sinlessness? 2 His
W-336.1. Forgiveness is the means appointed for perception's ending. 2 Knowledge is restored after
W-336.2. In quiet may forgiveness wipe away my dreams of separation and of sin. 2 Then let me,
W-337.1. My sinlessness ensures me perfect peace, eternal safety, everlasting love, freedom forever
W-337.2. You Who created me in sinlessness are not mistaken about what I am. 2 I was mistaken
W-338.1. It needs but this to let salvation come to all the world. 2 For in this single thought is
W-338.2. Your plan is sure, my Father,--only Yours. 2 All other plans will fail. 3 And I will have
W-339.1. No one desires pain. 2 But he can think that pain is pleasure. 3 No one would avoid his
W-339.2. Father, this is Your day. 2 It is a day in which I would do nothing by myself, but hear
W-340.1. Father, I thank You for today, and for the freedom I am certain it will bring. 2 This day is
W-340.2. Be glad today! 2 Be glad! 3 There is no room for anything but joy and thanks today. 4 Our
W-pII.13.1. A miracle is a correction. 2 It does not create, nor really change at all. 3 It merely looks
W-pII.13.2. A miracle contains the gift of grace, for it is given and received as one. 2 And thus it
W-pII.13.3. Forgiveness is the home of miracles. 2 The eyes of Christ deliver them to all they look
W-pII.13.4. The miracle is taken first on faith, because to ask for it implies the mind has been made
W-pII.13.5. Miracles fall like drops of healing rain from Heaven on a dry and dusty world, where
W-341.1. Father, Your Son is holy. 2 I am he on whom You smile in love and tenderness so dear
W-341.2. Let us not, then, attack our sinlessness, for it contains the Word of God to us. 2 And in its
W-342.1. I thank You, Father, for Your plan to save me from the hell I made. 2 It is not real. 3 And
W-342.2. Brother, forgive me now. 2 I come to you to take you home with me. 3 And as we go, the
W-343.1. The end of suffering can not be loss. 2 The gift of everything can be but gain. 3 You only
W-343.2. The mercy and the peace of God are free. 2 Salvation has no cost. 3 It is a gift that must
W-344.1. This is Your law, my Father, not my own. 2 I have not understood what giving means, and
W-344.2. How near we are to one another, as we go to God. 2 How near is He to us. 3 How close
W-345.1. Father, a miracle reflects Your gifts to me, Your Son. 2 And every one I give returns to
W-345.2. Peace to all seeking hearts today. 2 The light has come to offer miracles to bless the tired
W-346.1. Father, I wake today with miracles correcting my perception of all things. 2 And so
W-346.2. And when the evening comes today, we will remember nothing but the peace of God. 2
W-347.1. Father, I want what goes against my will, and do not want what is my will to have. 2
W-347.2. Listen today. 2 Be very still, and hear the gentle Voice for God assuring you that He has
W-348.1. Father, let me remember You are here, and I am not alone. 2 Surrounding me is
W-348.2. God's grace suffices us in everything that He would have us do. 2 And only that we
W-349.1. So would I liberate all things I see, and give to them the freedom that I seek. 2 For thus
W-349.2. Our Father knows our needs. 2 He gives us grace to meet them all. 3 And so we trust in
W-350.1. What we forgive becomes a part of us, as we perceive ourselves. 2 The Son of God
W-350.2. And as we gather miracles from Him, we will indeed be grateful. 2 For as we remember
W-pII.14.1. I am God's Son, complete and healed and whole, shining in the reflection of His Love. 2
W-pII.14.2. Our use for words is almost over now. 2 Yet in the final days of this one year we gave
W-pII.14.3. We are the bringers of salvation. 2 We accept our part as saviors of the world, which
W-pII.14.4. Ours are the eyes through which Christ's vision sees a world redeemed from every
W-pII.14.5. We are the holy messengers of God who speak for Him, and carrying His Word to
W-351.1. Who is my brother but Your holy Son? 2 And if I see him sinful I proclaim myself a sinner,
W-352.1. Forgiveness looks on sinlessness alone, and judges not. 2 Through this I come to You. 3
W-353.1. Father, I give all that is mine today to Christ, to use in any way that best will serve the
W-354.1. My oneness with the Christ establishes me as Your Son, beyond the reach of time, and
W-355.1. Why should I wait, my Father, for the joy You promised me? 2 For You will keep Your
W-356.1. Father, You promised You would never fail to answer any call Your Son might make to
W-357.1. Forgiveness, truth's reflection, tells me how to offer miracles, and thus escape the prison
W-358.1. You Who remember what I really am alone remember what I really want. 2 You speak for
W-359.1. Father, today we will forgive Your world, and let creation be Your Own. 2 We have
W-360.1. Father, it is Your peace that I would give, receiving it of You. 2 I am Your Son, forever
W-361-5.1. And if I need a word to help me, He will give it to me. 2 If I need a thought, that will
M-in.1. The role of teaching and learning is actually reversed in the thinking of the world. 2 The
M-in.2. To teach is to demonstrate. 2 There are only two thought systems, and you demonstrate that
M-in.3. The curriculum you set up is therefore determined exclusively by what you think you are,
M-in.4. This is inevitable. 2 There is no escape from it. 3 How could it be otherwise? 4 Everyone
M-in.5. Except for God's teachers there would be little hope of salvation, for the world of sin would
M-1.1. A teacher of God is anyone who chooses to be one. 2 His qualifications consist solely in
M-1.2. They come from all over the world. 2 They come from all religions and from no religion. 3
M-1.3. There is a course for every teacher of God. 2 The form of the course varies greatly. 3 So do
M-1.4. This is a manual for a special curriculum, intended for teachers of a special form of the
M-2.1. Certain pupils have been assigned to each of God's teachers, and they will begin to look for
M-2.2. In order to understand the teaching-learning plan of salvation, it is necessary to grasp the
M-2.3. The world of time is the world of illusion. 2 What happened long ago seems to be
M-2.4. Time really, then, goes backward to an instant so ancient that it is beyond all memory, and
M-2.5. When pupil and teacher come together, a teaching-learning situation begins. 2 For the
M-3.1. The teachers of God have no set teaching level. 2 Each teaching-learning situation involves
M-3.2. The simplest level of teaching appears to be quite superficial. 2 It consists of what seem to
M-3.3. It is difficult to understand that levels of teaching the universal course is a concept as
M-3.4. Each teaching-learning situation is maximal in the sense that each person involved will learn
M-3.5. The third level of teaching occurs in relationships which, once they are formed, are lifelong.
M-4.1. The surface traits of God's teachers are not at all alike. 2 They do not look alike to the body's
M-4.2. All differences among the Sons of God are temporary. 2 Nevertheless, in time it can be said
M-4.I.1. This is the foundation on which their ability to fulfill their function rests. 2 Perception is
M-4.I.2. When this power has once been experienced, it is impossible to trust one's own petty
M-4.I.A.3. First, they must go through what might be called "a period of undoing." 2 This need not
M-4.I.A.4. Next, the teacher of God must go through "a period of sorting out." 2 This is always
M-4.I.A.5. The third stage through which the teacher of God must go can be called "a period of
M-4.I.A.6. Now comes "a period of settling down." 2 This is a quiet time, in which the teacher of
M-4.I.A.7. The next stage is indeed "a period of unsettling." 2 Now must the teacher of God
M-4.I.A.8. And finally, there is "a period of achievement." 2 It is here that learning is consolidated.
M-4.II.1. All other traits of God's teachers rest on trust. 2 Once that has been achieved, the others
M-4.II.2. The peace of mind which the advanced teachers of God experience is largely due to their
M-4.III.1. God's teachers do not judge. 2 To judge is to be dishonest, for to judge is to assume a
M-4.IV.1. Harm is impossible for God's teachers. 2 They can neither harm nor be harmed. 3 Harm
M-4.IV.2. Therefore, God's teachers are wholly gentle. 2 They need the strength of gentleness, for it
M-4.V.1. Joy is the inevitable result of gentleness. 2 Gentleness means that fear is now impossible,
M-4.VI.1. God's teachers have learned how to be simple. 2 They have no dreams that need defense
M-4.VII.1. The term generosity has special meaning to the teacher of God. 2 It is not the usual
M-4.VII.2. The teacher of God is generous out of Self interest. 2 This does not refer, however, to
M-4.VIII.1. Those who are certain of the outcome can afford to wait, and wait without anxiety. 2
M-4.IX.1. The extent of the teacher of God's faithfulness is the measure of his advancement in the
M-4.IX.2. True faithfulness, however, does not deviate. 2 Being consistent, it is wholly honest. 3
M-4.X.1. The centrality of open-mindedness, perhaps the last of the attributes the teacher of God
M-4.X.2. How do the open-minded forgive? 2 They have let go all things that would prevent
M-4.X.3. You may have noticed that the list of attributes of God's teachers does not include things
M-5.1. Healing involves an understanding of what the illusion of sickness is for. 2 Healing is
M-5.I.1. Healing is accomplished the instant the sufferer no longer sees any value in pain. 2 Who
M-5.I.2. And what, in this insane conviction, does healing stand for? 2 It symbolizes the defeat of
M-5.II.1. Healing must occur in exact proportion to which the valuelessness of sickness is
M-5.II.2. The acceptance of sickness as a decision of the mind, for a purpose for which it would use
M-5.II.3. What is the single requisite for this shift in perception? 2 It is simply this; the recognition
M-5.II.4. With this idea is pain forever gone. 2 But with this idea goes also all confusion about
M-5.III.1. If the patient must change his mind in order to be healed, what does the teacher of God
M-5.III.2. To them God's teachers come, to represent another choice which they had forgotten. 2
M-5.III.3. Not once do the advanced teachers of God consider the forms of sickness in which their
M-6.1. Healing is always certain. 2 It is impossible to let illusions be brought to truth and keep the
M-6.2. Healing will always stand aside when it would be seen as threat. 2 The instant it is welcome
M-6.3. It is not the function of God's teachers to evaluate the outcome of their gifts. 2 It is merely
M-6.4. It is the relinquishing of all concern about the gift that makes it truly given. 2 And it is trust
M-7.1. This question really answers itself. 2 Healing cannot be repeated. 3 If the patient is healed,
M-7.2. Whenever a teacher of God has tried to be a channel for healing he has succeeded. 2 Should
M-7.3. It is in this that the teacher of God must trust. 2 This is what is really meant by the statement
M-7.4. One of the most difficult temptations to recognize is that to doubt a healing because of the
M-7.5. The real basis for doubt about the outcome of any problem that has been given to God's
M-7.6. The mistake is always some form of concern with the self to the exclusion of the patient. 2 It
M-8.1. The belief in order of difficulties is the basis for the world's perception. 2 It rests on
M-8.2. Illusions are always illusions of differences. 2 How could it be otherwise? 3 By definition,
M-8.3. Where do all these differences come from? 2 Certainly they seem to be in the world outside.
M-8.4. It is in the sorting out and categorizing activities of the mind that errors in perception enter.
M-8.5. There can be no order of difficulty in healing merely because all sickness is illusion. 2 Is it
M-8.6. The body's eyes will continue to see differences. 2 But the mind that has let itself be healed
M-9.1. Changes are required in the minds of God's teachers. 2 This may or may not involve changes
M-9.2. As the teacher of God advances in his training, he learns one lesson with increasing
M-10.1. Judgment, like other devices by which the world of illusions is maintained, is totally
M-10.2. It is necessary for the teacher of God to realize, not that he should not judge, but that he
M-10.3. The aim of our curriculum, unlike the goal of the world's learning, is the recognition that
M-10.4. Remember how many times you thought you knew all the "facts" you needed for judgment,
M-10.5. Therefore lay judgment down, not with regret but with a sigh of gratitude. 2 Now are you
M-10.6. It is not difficult to relinquish judgment. 2 But it is difficult indeed to try to keep it. 3 The
M-11.1. This is a question everyone must ask. 2 Certainly peace seems to be impossible here. 3 Yet
M-11.2. Again we come to the question of judgment. 2 This time ask yourself whether your
M-11.3. The text explains that the Holy Spirit is the Answer to all problems you have made. 2 These
M-11.4. Peace is impossible to those who look on war. 2 Peace is inevitable to those who offer
M-12.1. The answer to this question is--one. 2 One wholly perfect teacher, whose learning is
M-12.2. Thus does the son of man become the Son of God. 2 It is not really a change; it is a change
M-12.3. Why is the illusion of many necessary? 2 Only because reality is not understandable to the
M-12.4. Yet what makes God's teachers is their recognition of the proper purpose of the body. 2 As
M-12.5. The central lesson is always this; that what you use the body for it will become to you. 2
M-12.6. Oneness and sickness cannot coexist. 2 God's teachers choose to look on dreams a while. 3
M-13.1. Although in truth the term sacrifice is altogether meaningless, it does have meaning in the
M-13.2. It takes great learning both to realize and to accept the fact that the world has nothing to
M-13.3. Once this confusion has occurred, it becomes impossible for the mind to understand that all
M-13.4. God's teachers can have no regret on giving up the pleasures of the world. 2 Is it a sacrifice
M-13.5. What is the real meaning of sacrifice? 2 It is the cost of believing in illusions. 3 It is the
M-13.6. You may believe this course requires sacrifice of all you really hold dear. 2 In one sense
M-13.7. Do not forget that sacrifice is total. 2 There are no half sacrifices. 3 You cannot give up
M-13.8. Teacher of God, do not forget the meaning of sacrifice, and remember what each decision
M-14.1. Can what has no beginning really end? 2 The world will end in an illusion, as it began. 3
M-14.2. Until forgiveness is complete, the world does have a purpose. 2 It becomes the home in
M-14.3. Certainly this seems to be a long, long while away. 2 "When not one thought of sin
M-14.4. The world will end when its thought system has been completely reversed. 2 Until then,
M-14.5. The world will end in joy, because it is a place of sorrow. 2 When joy has come, the
M-15.1. Indeed, yes! 2 No one can escape God's Final Judgment. 3 Who could flee forever from the
M-15.2. Is this your judgment on yourself, teacher of God? 2 Do you believe that this is wholly
M-15.3. You who are sometimes sad and sometimes angry; who sometimes feel your just due is not
M-16.1. To the advanced teacher of God this question is meaningless. 2 There is no program, for
M-16.2. But what about those who have not reached his certainty? 2 They are not yet ready for such
M-16.3. At the beginning, it is wise to think in terms of time. 2 This is by no means the ultimate
M-16.4. This course is always practical. 2 It may be that the teacher of God is not in a situation that
M-16.5. The same procedures should be followed at night. 2 Perhaps your quiet time should be
M-16.6. There is one thought in particular that should be remembered throughout the day. 2 It is a
M-16.7. How simply and how easily does time slip by for the teacher of God who has accepted His
M-16.8. Yet there will be temptations along the way the teacher of God has yet to travel, and he has
M-16.9. The avoidance of magic is the avoidance of temptation. 2 For all temptation is nothing
M-16.10. There is no substitute for the Will of God. 2 In simple statement, it is to this fact that the
M-16.11. Is not this an exchange that you would want? 2 The world would gladly make it, if it knew
M-17.1. This is a crucial question both for teacher and pupil. 2 If this issue is mishandled, the
M-17.2. There is, however, a temptation to respond to magic in a way that reinforces it. 2 Nor is
M-17.3. It is easiest to let error be corrected where it is most apparent, and errors can be recognized
M-17.4. Perhaps it will be helpful to remember that no one can be angry at a fact. 2 It is always an
M-17.5. Anger in response to perceived magic thoughts is a basic cause of fear. 2 Consider what
M-17.6. How can this unfair battle be resolved? 2 Its ending is inevitable, for its outcome must be
M-17.7. But what will now be your reaction to all magic thoughts? 2 They can but reawaken
M-17.8. Into this hopeless situation God sends His teachers. 2 They bring the light of hope from
M-17.9. Madness but seems terrible. 2 In truth it has no power to make anything. 3 Like the magic
M-18.1. Correction of a lasting nature,--and only this is true correction,--cannot be made until the
M-18.2. God's teachers' major lesson is to learn how to react to magic thoughts wholly without
M-18.3. Anger but screeches, "Guilt is real!" 2 Reality is blotted out as this insane belief is taken as
M-18.4. In order to heal, it thus becomes essential for the teacher of God to let all his own mistakes
M-19.1. Justice is the divine correction for injustice. 2 Injustice is the basis for all the judgments of
M-19.2. Justice, like its opposite, is an interpretation. 2 It is, however, the one interpretation that
M-19.3. All concepts of your brothers and yourself; all fears of future states and all concerns about
M-19.4. Salvation is God's justice. 2 It restores to your awareness the wholeness of the fragments
M-19.5. Pray for God's justice, and do not confuse His mercy with your own insanity. 2 Perception
M-20.1. It has been said that there is a kind of peace that is not of this world. 2 How is it
M-20.2. First, how can the peace of God be recognized? 2 God's peace is recognized at first by just
M-20.3. How is this quiet found? 2 No one can fail to find it who but seeks out its conditions. 3
M-20.4. How is the peace of God retained, once it is found? 2 Returning anger, in whatever form,
M-20.5. Living is joy, but death can only weep. 2 You see in death escape from what you made. 3
M-20.6. What is the peace of God? 2 No more than this; the simple understanding that His Will is
M-21.1. Strictly speaking, words play no part at all in healing. 2 The motivating factor is prayer, or
M-21.2. As symbols, words have quite specific references. 2 Even when they seem most abstract,
M-21.3. The prayer for things of this world will bring experiences of this world. 2 If the prayer of
M-21.4. Is the teacher of God, then, to avoid the use of words in his teaching? 2 No, indeed! 3
M-21.5. A major hindrance in this aspect of his learning is the teacher of God's fear about the
M-22.1. Healing and Atonement are not related; they are identical. 2 There is no order of difficulty
M-22.2. The progress of the teacher of God may be slow or rapid, depending on whether he
M-22.3. That forgiveness is healing needs to be understood, if the teacher of God is to make
M-22.4. Certainly sickness does not appear to be a decision. 2 Nor would anyone actually believe
M-22.5. When a teacher of God fails to heal, it is because he has forgotten Who he is. 2 Another's
M-22.6. The offer of Atonement is universal. 2 It is equally applicable to all individuals in all
M-22.7. Who can limit the power of God Himself? 2 Who, then, can say which one can be healed
M-23.1. God's gifts can rarely be received directly. 2 Even the most advanced of God's teachers will
M-23.2. We have repeatedly said that one who has perfectly accepted the Atonement for himself
M-23.3. What does this mean for you? 2 It means that in remembering Jesus you are remembering
M-23.4. The name of Jesus Christ as such is but a symbol. 2 But it stands for love that is not of this
M-23.5. Jesus has led the way. 2 Why would you not be grateful to him? 3 He has asked for love,
M-23.6. No one on earth can grasp what Heaven is, or what its one Creator really means. 2 Yet we
M-23.7. This course has come from him because his words have reached you in a language you can
M-24.1. In the ultimate sense, reincarnation is impossible. 2 There is no past or future, and the idea
M-24.2. Reincarnation would not, under any circumstances, be the problem to be dealt with now . 2
M-24.3. For our purposes, it would not be helpful to take any definite stand on reincarnation. 2 A
M-24.4. It cannot be too strongly emphasized that this course aims at a complete reversal of
M-24.5. Does this mean that the teacher of God should not believe in reincarnation himself, or
M-24.6. The emphasis of this course always remains the same;--it is at this moment that complete
M-25.1. The answer to this question is much like the preceding one. 2 There are, of course, no
M-25.2. Certainly there are many "psychic" powers that are clearly in line with this course. 2
M-25.3. The seemingly new abilities that may be gathered on the way can be very helpful. 2 Given
M-25.4. Nothing that is genuine is used to deceive. 2 The Holy Spirit is incapable of deception, and
M-25.5. Even those who no longer value the material things of the world may still be deceived by
M-25.6. Any ability that anyone develops has the potentiality for good. 2 To this there is no
M-26.1. God indeed can be reached directly, for there is no distance between Him and His Son. 2
M-26.2. There are those who have reached God directly, retaining no trace of worldly limits and
M-26.3. Sometimes a teacher of God may have a brief experience of direct union with God. 2 In
M-26.4. Do not despair, then, because of limitations. 2 It is your function to escape from them, but
M-27.1. Death is the central dream from which all illusions stem. 2 Is it not madness to think of life
M-27.2. In this perception of the universe as God created it, it would be impossible to think of Him
M-27.3. Death is the symbol of the fear of God. 2 His Love is blotted out in the idea, which holds it
M-27.4. The curious belief that there is part of dying things that may go on apart from what will die,
M-27.5. The "reality" of death is firmly rooted in the belief that God's Son is a body. 2 And if God
M-27.6. "And the last to be overcome will be death." 2 Of course! 3 Without the idea of death there
M-27.7. Teacher of God, your one assignment could be stated thus: Accept no compromise in
M-28.1. Very simply, the resurrection is the overcoming or surmounting of death. 2 It is a
M-28.2. The resurrection is the denial of death, being the assertion of life. 2 Thus is all the thinking
M-28.3. Here the curriculum ends. 2 From here on, no directions are needed. 3 Vision is wholly
M-28.4. All living hearts are tranquil with a stir of deep anticipation, for the time of everlasting
M-28.5. Now there are no distinctions. 2 Differences have disappeared and Love looks on Itself. 3
M-28.6. These things await us all, but we are not prepared as yet to welcome them with joy. 2 As
M-29.1. This manual is not intended to answer all questions that both teacher and pupil may raise. 2
M-29.2. Which is for which? 2 Who would profit more from prayers alone? 3 Who needs but a
M-29.3. There is another advantage,-- and a very important one,-- in referring decisions to the Holy
M-29.4. Here again is the paradox often referred to in the course. 2 To say, "Of myself I can do
M-29.5. Who assumes a power that he does not possess is deceiving himself. 2 Yet to accept the
M-29.6. Never forget that the Holy Spirit does not depend on your words. 2 He understands the
M-29.7. Remember you are His completion and His Love. 2 Remember your weakness is His
M-29.8. And now in all your doings be you blessed.
